Finally, a serial-killer movie so preposterous, so garnished with accidental laugh lines and absent essential narrative logic it may actually put a permanent kibosh on this tediously overworked crime subgenre. Here's hoping, at any rate. Directed with self-conscious hothouse flair by E. Elias Merhige, from a puzzler of a screenplay credited to Zak Penn and Billy Ray, ''Suspect Zero,'' which opens nationwide today, involves a serial killer who's doing away with other serial killers and the disgraced F.B.I. agent who refuses to let this meta-murder madness go unpunished. Think ''Seven'' minus the talent.
Soon after the agent, Thomas Mackelway (Aaron Eckhart), lands in the F.B.I.'s sleepy Albuquerque bureau, he discovers a man's mutilated body carefully arranged amid the cactuses and sand. One thing leads to another, leads to a few more corpses and a halfway house where twitchy Benjamin O'Ryan (Ben Kingsley) scratches out the kind of eerily beautiful artwork so beloved of movie sociopaths.
Aided by his reluctant partner (Carrie-Anne Moss) and some meager tactical support (played by, among others, the always valuable character actor Harry Lennix), Mackelway tracks O'Ryan, trying to discover what connects him to the bodies cluttering up the morgue. Because O'Ryan scatters the trail with clues as big as bread crumbs, it soon appears that the hunter and the hunted may be on the same horrific page even if the director and the screenwriters are not.
Stuff happens, mostly by fits and starts. Children go missing, the venerable director and screenwriter Robert Towne (''Chinatown'') pops in for an amusing unbilled cameo, and dread seeps into the scenery only to be sucked into the vacuum of the plot. Mr. Merhige -- whose previous features are the sui generis cult item ''Begotten'' and ''Shadow of the Vampire,'' a fictional gloss on the making of F. W. Murnau's silent classic ''Nosferatu'' -- has a sense of the macabre and an eye for outré detail. But his grasp on genre niceties is less than firm, or perhaps he's just not interested in sticking to the straight and narrow. Whatever the case, Mr. Merhige routinely wanders away from the absurd main story to doodle in its margins, where he conjures up ghostly silhouettes, anguished camera angles and a derelict landscape washed in blood red.
Despite the gothic filigree and Mr. Merhige's strained attempt to wed shivers with high-art allusions and a few empty political gestures (think Leatherface meets Marcel Duchamp under a wind-snapped American flag), ''Suspect Zero'' doesn't take long to collapse under the weight of its ridiculous conceit and the depressing specter of countless dead. Even draped in aesthetic pretension, exploitative schlock is still exploitative schlock.
What it all means and how it adds up is, in the end, distinctly less interesting than how and why this half-baked project attracted movie-industry power hitters like Paula Wagner, the film's co-producer and Tom Cruise's production partner; Mr. Ray, who directed last year's acclaimed independent film ''Shattered Glass''; and Mr. Kingsley and Ms. Moss, both of whom do much more for ''Suspect Zero'' than it does for them.
''Suspect Zero''' 
~
Spinning heads, cascades of pea soup and your mother's Army boots are nowhere to be found in ''Exorcist: The Beginning,'' but lovers of the ridiculous may be delighted to know that the specter of little Linda Blair a-twitch and a-tremble is not entirely forgotten. A prequel to ''The Exorcist,'' William Friedkin's 1973 shocker in which Ms. Blair played a child hijacked by Beelzebub, this new film comes gussied up with some fine talent and its very own bag of cheap tricks. But when push comes to demonic shove, hell apparently hath no fury like a woman in green pancake makeup just as surely as some producers have no shame.
''Exorcist: The Beginning,'' which opened nationwide yesterday and given its doleful prospects may soon be known as ''Exorcist: The End,'' is the third feature film to be squeezed from the pulpy remains of Mr. Friedkin's original. (That film spawned two less-acclaimed sequels, and four years ago it was re-released in theaters with some padding and tweaks.) Based on the William Peter Blatty best seller, the first ''Exorcist'' mostly entails the efforts of two priests trying to beat the devil out of Ms. Blair's 12-year-old with the aid of pop metaphysics and some exceedingly dated special effects. A monster hit and very effective for a certain teenager who must remain nameless, Mr. Friedkin's film has not held up well, but compared with this latest effort does vaguely resemble the classic of 1970's cinema its fans tout it as.
''Exorcist: The Beginning'' was directed by Renny Harlin, whose previous efforts include a solid ''Nightmare on Elm Street'' sequel, a bad ''Die Hard'' sequel and the diverting thriller ''The Long Kiss Goodnight.'' Slick and devoid of any obvious personal signature, Mr. Harlin's directorial style is serviceable enough for a movie like ''Exorcist: The Beginning,'' which exists solely to rake in cash during its opening weekend and settle into a long shelf-life in the DVD hereafter.
As it happens, the DVD release will be more interesting than the theatrical one if, as floated in Variety, it includes the version of this prequel shot by the director Paul Schrader. Mr. Schrader was fired from the project on grounds that his prequel was not scary. Mr. Schrader, in turn, had replaced the film's initial director, John Frankenheimer, who died during preproduction.
All this background noise, alas, turns out to be more interesting than what has managed to finally make it on to the screen. Written by Alexi Hawley, who was brought in to revamp William Wisher and Caleb Carr's earlier screenplay, ''Exorcist: The Beginning'' opens centuries ago with a priest stumbling through a landscape littered with bloodied corpses and the writhing bodies of the soon to be dead. From there it's a fast cut to Cairo circa 1949, where amid the putatively exotic third-world sights and sounds the Swedish actor Stellan Skarsgard sits in a bar wearing the rumpled white suit and anomie of a B-movie hero. This world-weary traveler is, of course, Merrin, the same character played by the Swedish actor Max von Sydow in ''The Exorcist,'' but now without the sanctity of the priestly collar.
What ensues essentially conforms to the movie horror manual, though the production does benefit from the talents of the Italian cinematographer Vittorio Storaro, who has given the film a nice nicotine-stain patina. Wrapped in this burnished orange glow, Merrin, having taken a mysterious assignment, creases his brow and tries to discover what a Catholic church is doing buried in the sand in northern Kenya (actually Italy's Cinecittà Studios), which is where most of the film's 117 draggy minutes play out. Along for the ride are the usual movie suspects, including a beautiful doctor with peek-a-boo décolletage and a fondness for late-night showering (Izabella Scorupco), a young priest straight from the Vatican (James D'Arcy), a helpful local with a bull's-eye fixed to his forehead (Andrew French) and various other sacrificial lambs, including children, all of whom are lovingly skewered with graphic detail.
Despite the body count and Mr. Harlin's reliance on shock cuts and loud noises, ''Exorcist: The Beginning'' singularly fails to deliver any palpable shivers. Perhaps more expectedly, given the torturous production history and the unceremonious introduction of the movie (the studio didn't screen the film for critics until the night before it opened), it does afford the occasional and presumably unintended laugh. Still, despite the risible dialogue, the bulging eyeballs, the heaving bosoms, the digitally rendered hyenas and squirming maggots, the movie fails to achieve the status of the instant camp classic. That's partly because the vibe of the film is too torpid. It simply doesn't have the buoyancy of camp, but mostly because it's deeply unpleasant to watch children, even fictional children, murdered on the altar of greed. Thrills rarely get cheaper or more loathsome.
''Exorcist: The Beginning'' 
~
As every red-blooded American male is at least partially aware, 1972 was the year camping trips lost their innocence. That was when the movie ''Deliverance'' introduced a new specter into the horror show of macho nightmares. Thanks to ''Deliverance'' and many subsequent rip-offs, every camper knows that behind every tree may lurk a sadistic, rotten-toothed hillbilly itching to rape a soft city slicker and make him squeal like a pig in front of his friends.
The homosexual panic instilled by ''Deliverance'' fuels the running joke (if that's the word for it) driving the uneasy laughs evoked by the loathsome comedy ''Without a Paddle,'' which opens today nationwide. Three buddies, 30 going on 13, embark on a ridiculous treasure hunt in the Pacific Northwest. Although no rape actually takes place, the threat of it is a constant source of leering humor. When the treasure hunters run afoul of a pair of gun-toting marijuana growers who resemble outlaw bikers, rape, torture and murder seem probable punishments, should the campers be caught.
Much of the movie is a frantic chase through the forest, in which the beer-bellied beasts pursue the wimpy city slickers. At one point, the friends hide in a treehouse where two nature-loving beauties are living an environmentally pure life. But even here, the dreaded possibility of androgyny raises its head, when one of the women (who don't shave) reveals a hairy leg. When the beasts arrive, the women's stored-up bags of excrement come in handy as stink bombs dropped from above.
Later in ''Without a Paddle,'' directed by Steven Brill, the friends, shivering and nearly naked in a downpour, find themselves forced to curl up together in a ball to avoid hypothermia. Homosexual panic is exploited for easy guffaws as the companions, wincing in revulsion, cling to one another fearing the worst (a stray erection), and of course the worst happens. Much is also made of the fondness of Dan (Seth Green), the wimpiest of the three, for the old Culture Club hit ''Do You Really Want to Hurt Me?,'' an affection for which signifies possible gayness. Dan sings it out loud to combat his claustrophobia while squirming through a tunnel.
To be fair, ''Without a Paddle'' is only the latest in a spate of teenage and post-teen buddy comedies to trade on gay panic for laughs. The movie, which pushes its ugly humor further than most, follows Dan (a doctor with a suitcase full of phobias), and his grownup childhood buddies Tom (Dax Shepard), and Jerry (Matthew Lillard) on their jaunt back to nature. Tom is a pathological liar with a bogus résumé as a whitewater rapids guide, and Jerry is an overstressed insurance executive with infallibly bad judgment when it comes to roughing it.
The trip is inspired by the death of Billy, the fourth and most glamorous member of their childhood clique. As boys they used to fantasize searching for the $200,000 stash of a legendary bank robber who disappeared in the forests of Oregon. When they reconvene in their childhood treehouse after Billy's funeral, they discover the treasure map he drew, along with a cereal box compass, and decide to honor his memory by venturing into the wild and fulfilling his quest.
In an early life-threatening mishap, they are menaced by a computer-generated bear with a taste for cellphones. The overlong bear sequence is so poorly coordinated that the animal poses no palpable physical threat. The movie's final joke and homage to ''Deliverance'' is the appearance of Burt Reynolds himself as a shaggy hermit who has lived in the woods for 30 years. With Mr. Reynolds consenting to lend his name to such a shabby enterprise, the joke is really on him.
''Without a Paddle'' 
~
''Nicotina,'' a grisly, comical shaggy-dog thriller from Mexico, provides the latest evidence that, a decade after ''Pulp Fiction,'' the international movement we might call Tarantinismo is alive and well. Or maybe just alive.
''Nicotina,'' which opens today nationally, was directed by Hugo Rodríguez from a script by Martín Salinas, and while it demonstrates some formal ingenuity, it is for the most part a tasteless and derivative stew of overdone jokes, chronological tricks and labored shock effects. Mr. Tarantino has long since moved on (and can hardly be blamed for the extent of his influence), but Mr. Rodríguez and Mr. Salinas are still messing around with his discarded gimmicks, along with bits and pieces from other aggressively cool movies from the recent past, like ''Run Lola Run'' and ''Amores Perros.''
At the center of the plot, as you might expect, is a caper gone awry. A computer hacker named Lolo (Diego Luna) has procured some Swiss bank access codes, and his confederates, Nene (Lucas Crespi) and Tomson (Jesús Ochoa), plan to give them to some Russian mobsters in exchange for diamonds. Such work is a bit of a distraction for Lolo, whose vocation is spying on his pretty neighbor (Marta Beláustegui), a cellist whose every word and gesture makes its way to his desktop monitor. It says a lot about the filmmakers' sensibility that Lolo, objectively a creepy, unapologetic voyeur, is the most sympathetic character in the picture.
Not that his feelings matter much. A movie like ''Nicotina'' runs on travestied emotions and daredevil kineticism. Mr. Rodríguez does have a good eye and an assured sense of timing, and he has assembled a cast of interesting actors, whom the story arranges into quarreling pairs. Nene and Tomson carry on a running debate about the dangers of smoking, which turns into a gangster philosophy seminar on the relationship between fate and coincidence. Meanwhile, two married couples, each running a small business, are drawn into the action: Carmen (Rosa María Bianchi) and Goyo (Rafael Inclán) squabble over money in their modest hairdressing salon, while Beto (Daniel Giménez Cacho) and Clara (Carmen Madrid) fight about mislabeled medicines and smoking in their pharmacy.
Given the film's title, it is not surprising that smoking figures so prominently in the story. Each pair of characters, including Lolo and his neighbor, consists of a smoker and a nonsmoker, and the picture has the antic, irritable energy of a 90-minute nicotine fit. The narrative, which unfolds in real time, is punctuated by shootings and other acts of violence that are meant to serve as brutal punch lines, truncating colorful and surreal passages of criminal incompetence and domestic disorder. But sudden, violent death is not really all that funny, and the rising body count of ''Nicotina'' suggests that at the end, having boxed themselves into an elaborate and unconvincing story, Mr. Salinas and Mr. Rodríguez found themselves out of ideas and out of breath.
''Nicotina'' 
~
Twentieth Century Fox threw its baby to the wolves yesterday, opening ''Alien vs. Predator'' nationally on Friday without holding advance screenings for film reviewers. That's often a sign that a movie is a major disaster, but the film turns out to be no worse than most mindless summer action films, and even has some solid formal qualities thanks to the director, Paul W. S. Anderson.
Mr. Anderson, not to be confused with his close namesake, Paul Thomas Anderson of ''Boogie Nights'' and ''Magnolia,'' is a gifted creator of claustrophobic atmosphere whose unfortunate lot it has been to adapt at least two of his movies from video games -- ''Mortal Kombat'' (1995) and ''Resident Evil'' (2002). There is also a video game called ''Alien vs. Predator,'' but that apparently has little to do with this project, a simultaneous prequel to ''Alien'' (1979) and sequel to ''Predator'' (1986).
The notion of a face-off between Fox's two franchise monsters had been kicking around development offices for a decade before Mr. Anderson took on the project. The most likely reason that it hasn't been done before now is that no one has been able to lick the very large problem inherent in the concept: in a battle between ribcage-bursting Aliens and head-chopping Predators, where's the rooting interest?
Mr. Anderson hasn't solved that problem either, though he has spun a dark, handsome, well-designed film all around it. ''Alien vs. Predator'' is set not in outer space but in a Jules Verne world beneath the surface of the planet in an incalculably ancient pyramid buried 2,000 feet beneath the Antarctic ice cap.
Discovered by the billionaire industrialist Charles Bishop Weyland (Lance Henriksen, providing a link to James Cameron's 1986 ''Alien'' sequel, ''Aliens''), the pyramid becomes the object of a Shackleton-like expedition composed of assorted scientists and mercenaries. Weyland hires an ecological tour guide, Alexa Woods (Sanaa Lathan), to lead his group to the buried temple, which turns out to contain a giant mother Alien just waiting to breed new face-hugging offspring.
As the little band makes its way through the twisting corridors of the underground world (another convention of video games, though the sets do recall the underground worlds of Fritz Lang), it becomes clear that no one has designs on these puny humans. The Aliens have been hatched on command to provide prey for a new group of Predator hunters, who have to earn their stripes by killing their species' most dangerous foe.
The humans, including the Italian actor Raoul Bova (currently on screen in ''Facing Windows'') as an archaeologist and the Scottish character actor Ewan Bremner (''Trainspotting'') as a geologist, don't have much to do in ''Alien vs. Predator'' but put the plot in motion and stand back to watch it work, a precarious position that eventually claims most of them. Though Mr. Anderson finds a rooting interest, it's too far-fetched even for fantasy, and the film turns into a cold but occasionally impressive special-effects extravaganza.
Between the Predators' dripping their glow-in-the-dark green blood and the Aliens' getting their rubber cement mucous all over everything, this is certainly a very sticky movie, though not, ultimately, a very frightening or commanding one.
''Alien vs. Predator'' has been rated PG-13 (parents strongly cautioned) for its virtually nonstop violence and alien gore.
ALIEN VS. PREDATOR
Directed by Paul W. S. Anderson; written by Mr. Anderson, based on a story by Mr. Anderson, Dan O'Bannon and Ronald Shusett, and the Alien characters created by Mr. O'Bannon and Mr. Shusett and the Predator characters created by Jim Thomas and John Thomas; director of photography, David Johnson; edited by Alexander Berner; music by Harald Kloser; production designer, Richard Bridgland; creature effects by Alec Gillis and Tom Woodruff Jr.; original Alien creatures designed by H. R. Giger; produced by John Davis, Gordon Carroll, David Giler and Walter Hill; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 110 minutes. This film 
~
For as long as anyone can remember, American movie actors have been exploring their vulnerable and sensitive sides. Masculine displays of unguarded feeling and agonized introspection may be the norm in serious dramas, but the depiction of genuine male weakness remains something of a taboo. Very few leading men are brave enough to risk appearing cowardly, indecisive or passive-aggressive, and ordinary men in the audience, observing these traits onscreen, are likely to decline the invitation to identify with them.
We would much rather think of ourselves as stoic, fearless and empathetic, however distant our real selves are from these ideals.
The willingness to appear weak -- to represent, in other words, a familiar variety of real, contemporary American man -- may be Mark Ruffalo's great distinction as an actor. Even when he plays cops, in pictures like Jane Campion's ''In the Cut'' and Michael Mann's ''Collateral,'' he does it with a visible tremble of hesitation. In Kenneth Lonergan's ''You Can Count on Me,'' the film that first brought him widespread attention, Mr. Ruffalo's character was generous and sweet-natured, but also feckless, selfish and unreliable, in perpetual flight from maturity.
Jack Linden, the straying husband he plays in ''We Don't Live Here Anymore,'' a thoroughly intelligent, half-satisfying story of marital woe that opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is more solidly settled into the trappings (and traps) of adulthood, with a wife, two young children and a job teaching literature at a small New England college. But he is still, underneath his dutiful displays of grown-up responsibility, a petulant and manipulative boy. Jack is a complicated character -- a nice guy skilled in cruelty and betrayal, a thoughtful person who can't think straight about his actions -- and your response to him is likely to hover between sympathy and revulsion.
This mixed reaction is only fitting. Mr. Ruffalo's asymmetrical face, with its soft mouth and large, worried eyes, was designed to show ambivalence, and the film, adapted from two novellas by Andre Dubus, is more interested in observing the nuances of domestic and sexual behavior than in judging its sad, confused inhabitants. Jack's weakness occupies the foreground of the story. (In the story that gives the film its title, he is the first-person narrator.)
But he is only one player in an uncomfortable four-way game of envy, longing and dissatisfaction. He is sleeping with Edith (Naomi Watts), who is married to Hank (Peter Krause), a writer who is Jack's colleague, jogging partner and best (if not only) friend. Edith initiated the affair as revenge for Hank's earlier infidelities, and as a way of assuaging his own guilt, Jack nudges his wife, Terry (Laura Dern), into a dalliance with Hank.
Compared with Jack, whose air of unease and self-doubt are part of his attraction, Hank has the smirk of a man who has it all figured out. Even at his moments of torment, when his writing is going badly, he exudes a smooth, knowing self-confidence. He and Edith have a little more money than Jack and Terry, and their house is quieter, cleaner and more modern. Jack's envy of his friend is palpable, even as it remains mostly unspoken. His affair with Edith is partly a campaign of covert aggression against Hank, and also against Terry, whose disorderly housekeeping and emotional volatility stand in vivid contrast to Edith's cool, genteel melancholy.
All of this is, perhaps, a bit too schematic. The sneaking and coupling, the revelations and exposures that drive the narrative of ''We Don't Live Here Anymore'' at times come close to the hectic door-slamming of bedroom farce; they might, at any rate, if the sex actually took place in bedrooms, or if the movie had a sense of humor. Dubus's plain-spoken prose has an undertone of Yankee wryness; the somber, autumnal quiet that governs his stories is broken, at crucial moments, by a crackle of laughter at the dogged ridiculousness that attends even moments of great distress. A hint of this survives in some of the dialogue that Larry Gross's screenplay has carefully lifted from Dubus's pages: Jack's odd, offhand use of the word carnivorous, for example, or the tinny grandiloquence he falls into during an argument with Terry.
But this film's director, John Curran, who made the aching, unsettling bohemian romance ''Praise'' in 1998, is not inclined to rescue his characters with levity. The music, by Michael Convertino, lies over the action like a shadow, gathering force from time to time to create a vague, insistent feeling of dread. An uncanny suspense ripples through the movie. Some of its recurrent images -- a railroad crossing, a rushing river -- carry a premonition of mortal danger, and you watch nervously, certain that something terrible is going to happen.
This anxiety, which is not altogether misplaced, turns ''We Don't Live Here Anymore'' from a domestic melodrama into a kind of marital film noir. Emotional violence rarely seems so menacing, or so close to the real thing, and the murk and mystery of marriage, adultery and friendship have seldom been illuminated with such harsh precision. Ms. Dern forsakes all vanity and makes no obvious plays for the audience's sympathy, even though her Terry may deserve it more than anyone else. She and Mr. Ruffalo skulk around each other in a dance of petty resentment and maladroit tenderness, which climaxes in one of the most lacerating and believable scenes of imploding love since Diane Keaton and Albert Finney fell apart in ''Shoot the Moon.''
Mr. Curran and Mr. Gross rotate the story on its axis, shifting perspective to allow each couple, married and otherwise, a moment or two of intimate revelation. ''We Don't Live Here Anymore'' is a cracked, dark crystal of a movie, but what it lacks is an adequate setting. The film's scope is so rigorously limited to the two families that when Hank and Edith give a party (to celebrate the publication of one of his poems), the presence of other people comes as something of a shock. Wait a minute, they have other friends? How could that be? The four of them behave, for the most part, like survivalists stranded in the remote wilderness, dependent on one another almost to the point of cannibalism.
Dubus wrote ''We Don't Live Here Anymore'' and ''Adultery,'' the other novella that is the basis for this movie, in the 1970's, and some of this film's efforts to bring his characters into the present give off a mothbally whiff of anachronism. In some cases this is trivial, as when Hank makes a big show of burning the manuscript of his novel, which is an empty gesture or a redundant one because he composed it on a laptop.
More awkward is the film's notion of marriage -- in particular of wifehood -- which seems to date not to the stripped-down short-story realism of the 70's but to the campus novels of the 50's. If Edith and Terry ever had professional or intellectual ambitions of their own, we don't hear about them. Their status as unhappy homemakers seems to result not from postfeminist choice, but from prefeminist habit.
But if the social context of ''We Don't Live Here Anymore'' is blurry and unreal, what happens inside those marriages is anything but. Compassionate though it is, this is not a movie that offers much in the way of solace. It insists that there is no end to human weakness, and not much cure for it either. That's pretty strong stuff.
''We Don't Live Here Anymore'' 
~
In the cardboard kingdom of Genovia, the setting for the new feature-length fairy tale ''The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement,'' the streets are as scrubbed of dirt and personality as a Disney theme park. A mythic European country where everyone speaks English accented by way of Britain, France and Brooklyn, Genovia is the adopted home of Princess Mia (Anne Hathaway), a onetime San Francisco teenager turned old-world pretender. Unlike Pinocchio, Mia doesn't hang her wish on just any star; she hangs it on the movie-made promise that every girl can find her inner princess and, like, you know, rule.
The story opens with Mia graduating from college (when we last saw her she was in high school) and zipping off to Genovia, which her grandmother, Queen Clarisse Renaldi (Julie Andrews), hopes she will govern someday soon. As in the original ''Princess Diaries,'' much of the putative comedy involves the free-spirited Mia working in gentle, contrapuntal harmony with her veddy, veddy proper grandmother. Because the ugly duckling has already molted into a swan, however, the plot this time around hinges on some minor palace intrigue and romances with two blow-dried suitors who take turns holding the royal hand while keeping a safe distance from the royal chastity. In between the cooing and wooing, the pratfalls and product placements, Ms. Hathaway and Ms. Andrews flash smiles of such dazzling wattage they could carry California through its next energy crisis.
''The Princess Diaries 2'' was directed by Garry Marshall, who has been selling wish-fulfillment fantasies for years, most notably in ''Pretty Woman'' and in the first ''Princess Diaries'' movie. Mr. Marshall, whose place in pop-culture heaven was secured long ago by television comedies like ''The Dick Van Dyke Show,'' on which he served as a writer, is not much of a film director. Depending on the budget, his movies look either cheap (like this one) or studio slick (''Pretty Woman''), and tend to have the same flat, presentational visual style that's familiar from most sitcoms. (That's why his movies fit so snugly into airplane monitors.) And as in those sitcoms shot in front of live audiences, Mr. Marshall's actors often play to the camera and wait for laughs, which can be a serious problem when the screenplay is as deeply unfunny as this one.
Built on vintage and newly minted clichés, Shonda Rhimes's script combines a classic storybook scenario with the usual self-help uplift. After undergoing a radical makeover in the first ''Princess'' movie, Anne has metamorphosed into a self-possessed young woman. She knows how to walk in high heels, iron the frizz out of her hair and whirl around the dance floor with ineligible partners without making them feel bad. True, her sexuality comes across as weirdly underdeveloped, closer to that of the preadolescents who constitute this G-rated movie's core audience, than that of most typical college graduates. But that's in keeping with the character whose appeal is largely predicated on being essentially unremarkable in every respect in looks, intelligence, personality and that most dubious of designated female traits, niceness.
There's nothing wrong with being nice if it means giving succor to the poor and being kind to animals, but there's something unsettling about a character as bland, mushy and fiber-free as soggy corn flakes. Once upon a different time, Mia might have found her truest self by hanging out with the soulfully truculent adolescent girls in ''Ghost World.'' Instead, Ms. Andrews whisked in with a face frozen in do-re-mi beatitude and carried Mia off to a world where every unruly hair and thought is as smoothed down as the grass on a windswept Bavarian mountain. In the first film, Mia discovered she was to the manner born. Now, the princess who would be queen learns what the rest of us know already: happy movie endings generally come to those women who eat their independence and, in time, a wedding cake too.
THE PRINCESS DIARIES 2
Royal Engagement
Directed by Garry Marshall; written by Shonda Rhimes, based on a story by Gina Wendkos and Ms. Rhimes and characters created by Meg Cabot; director of photography, Charles Minsky; edited by Bruce Green; music by John Debney; production designer, Albert Brenner; produced by Debra Martin Chase, Whitney Houston and Mario Iscovich; released by Walt Disney Pictures. Running time: 120 minutes. This film 
~
In ''Open Water,'' a low-budget, digital-video feature, a vacationing couple spend many hours stranded in the middle of the ocean hoping not to be eaten by sharks. The film, written and directed by Chris Kentis and produced by his wife, Laura Lau, is a minimalist thriller, made without special effects, animatronic monsters or histrionically suffering movie stars. The sharks, whose fins occasionally pierce the surface of the water and whose implacable bodies are glimpsed gliding beneath it, are real. They show no particular hostility toward Susan (Blanchard Ryan) and Daniel (Daniel Travis), even as lunchtime passes and the dinner hour approaches. Susan and Daniel, meanwhile, drift from stoicism to panic toward exhaustion as the tropical sea ripples around them.
The sharks are scary, and the ocean is vast and indifferent, but the most effective parts of ''Open Water,'' which is ultimately too modest to be very memorable, evoke a deeper terror, one that can chill even those viewers who would never dream of putting on a wet suit and jumping off a boat. Susan and Daniel, nondescript, stressed-out tourists staying in an unidentified Caribbean resort town, set off for a morning dive with a charter company that proves a little too easygoing.
Somehow, the crew mixes up the head count, and the boat chugs away while Susan and Daniel are still underwater. This casual abandonment seems to fulfill a primal anxiety experienced by children who wander away from their parents -- not just a fear of being lost, but a dread of being forgotten. Whether or not Susan and Daniel survive the sharks and the elements, they have already, in a sense, ceased to exist, an implication driven home when the camera returns now and then to shore, where people dance and drink and shop as if nothing terrible could ever happen.
The movie succeeds in mobilizing the audience's dread, but it fails to make us care as much as we should about the fate of its heroes. Mr. Kentis has taken pains not to make them too interesting, and Mr. Travis and Ms. Ryan oblige by not trying to act too much. At the beginning, before the boat sets out, we glean that things are not altogether harmonious between them: she is distracted by her work; he is passive-aggressively needy; their sex life seems tepid.
These unexplored, hinted-at tensions blossom in the movie's best and wittiest scene, a spat that erupts after seven hours of treading water. As Susan and Daniel spit the clichés of modern couplehood across -- ''Are you saying this is my fault?'' ''Let's just drop the subject'' -- you can't help but laugh.
And it's only under extreme duress that the two of them reveal any humor. ''Feel better now?'' Susan asks Daniel after he curses the incompetent charter company. ''Well I wouldn't say better, exactly,'' he replies. She also forgives him for watching ''Shark Week'' and diving adventure shows on television, though she does note that her preference would have been to go skiing instead. Given the circumstances, it's hard to argue.
''Open Water'' feeds on the appetite for danger that such programs reflect. Like the semi-documentary ''Touching the Void,'' this film, based on a true story, titillates us with the dread of (someone else's) exotic death, and teases us with the illusion that what we are watching is real. The bland ordinariness of the characters, the flat colors and jerky rhythms of digital cinematography and the constriction of the drama give the picture some impact, but not much resonance. It pulls you in and then pushes you away, so that you leave saying, ''Wow, how awful'' without having experienced a full measure of awe.
''Open Water'' opens today in New York City, Los Angeles and Orange County, San Francisco Bay Area, Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, Washington, Seattle, Denver, Minneapolis, Detroit, San Diego and San Jose, Calif. The film 
~
Batting the lashes of her large, vacant eyes and sucking her lower lip into a pout, Brittany Murphy suggests a dumbed-down Meg Ryan with a gloss of Melanie Griffith in the sweet but mostly sour comedy ''Little Black Book.'' The movie, which opens nationally today, aspires to be a dewy-eyed self-help fable for ambitious young women folded into a mean-spirited satire of Jerry Springer-style reality television.
Offering few laughs and a climactic scene of breathtaking cruelty, this plot-heavy movie, directed by Nick Hurran from a screenplay by Melissa Carter and Elisa Bell, draws you into its malignant force field against your will.
Almost from the beginning, the film's sugary and rancid strains work against each other. To put it another way, ''Little Black Book'' would like to be a wised-up but still starry-eyed ''Working Girl'' (with New Jersey replacing Staten Island as the plucky heroine's home base and Carly Simon's music pushing the story along) and a more acerbic ''Broadcast News.'' (That movie's star, Holly Hunter, appears as Ms. Murphy's most poisonous colleague). In trying to be both at once, ''Little Black Book'' can't hold a candle to either.
Ms. Murphy's character, Stacy Holt, who narrates the movie in a too-cute voice, begins the film by describing her twin obsessions: Diane Sawyer and the catechism of romance according to Ms. Simon's hits. After a sketch of Stacy's childhood, we meet the grown-up Stacy, who is living in uneasy bliss with Derek (Ron Livingston), a dapper recruiter for a New Jersey hockey team and a man with a past who won't discuss his romantic history.
Stacy's dreams of a big-time career in television inch one step closer to reality when she lands a job as an associate producer for Kippie Kann (Kathy Bates), a fading talk show host given to topics like ''Grandma's a Hooker, So Handle It.'' When Derek goes on a business trip, Stacy is coaxed by her colleague Barb (Ms. Hunter) into going through the Palm Pilot he accidentally left behind. There Stacy discovers several scrapbooks' worth of material on his ex-girlfriends, along with evidence that he remains in close touch with one in particular.
The recently jilted Barb (the closest thing to a female Iago to come along in years) persuades Stacy to interview three of them by pretending to consider them as guests on the show. (Any thinking person in her right mind would, of course, say no). But Lulu (Josie Maran), a bulimic supermodel; Rachel (Rashida Jones), a gynecologist with a book to peddle; and Joyce (Julianne Nicholson), a rising chef, are only too happy to oblige.
Stacy learns to her shock that Joyce, a hockey fan who still pines for Derek, is seeing him regularly as a friend. And in fact, Ms. Nicholson's Joyce is so much more attractive, capable and emotionally honest than Ms. Murphy's whiny, self-centered Stacy that the notion that he would trade in Joyce for Stacy is ludicrous.
Although Ms. Murphy plays Stacy as an injured princess, the character's relentless treachery speaks for itself and outweighs her shallow contrition once her game is discovered. The movie also defeats both Ms. Hunter and Ms. Bates, two of our finest character actors. Ms. Bates is simply miscast in an unfocused role, and Ms. Hunter's transition from perky sidekick to psychopathic meddler is too big a stretch for anyone. The message sent by her character -- that mean girls only get meaner as they mature, especially without a man -- is hardly an empowering one for women.
The very elements that the rest of the movie tries to weave together are reconciled in the frequent songs by Ms. Simon, which describe in a blunt, self-assured tone the feelings of jealousy, insecurity and sexual competition that can plague even the best relationships. If only the movie were half as honest and self-aware as its soundtrack.
''Little Black Book'' 
~
The ubiquitous advertisements for ''The Village,'' which opens today nationwide, promise that ''nothing can prepare you.'' Nothing, that is, except M. Night Shyamalan's last three movies and a passing acquaintance with ''The Twilight Zone.'' It is hard to think of another filmmaker so utterly committed to the predictable manufacture of narrative surprise. His supernatural conceits may vary from picture to picture -- ghosts in ''The Sixth Sense,'' comic-book superheroics in ''Unbreakable,'' space aliens and crop circles in ''Signs'' -- but his stories are always built around a carefully disguised, meticulously prepared twist.
You can pass a pleasant few minutes outside the theater talking it over with your friends, but the conversations, like the movies that inspire them, tend to sound the same. For every innocent who professes amazement, there will be a wiseguy who says he saw it coming all along and an earnest analyst who picks the whole thing apart, looking for clues, foreshadowings and logical inconsistencies.
The last thing I want to do is spoil the fun, meager though it is. I will say, though, that while I am generally pretty obtuse about these matters, I had an inkling early on of where ''The Village'' was going, which I then dismissed as too ridiculous to consider. When I turned out to be right I felt less vindicated than cheated. The film's ridiculousness would not be so irksome if Mr. Shyamalan did not take his sleight of hand so seriously, if he did not insist on dressing this scary, silly, moderately clever fairy tale in a somber cloak of allegory.
I suppose it is to his credit that he wants the audience to think -- about fear, security and the fine line between rationality and superstition -- as well as tremble, but his ideas are as sloppy and obvious as his direction is elegant and restrained. He turns an artful gothic tale into a homework assignment.
His impressive cast, meanwhile, bustles around as if ''The Village'' were the school play -- ''Our Town,'' maybe, or ''The Lottery.'' Their village, which appears not to have a name, is somewhere in the preindustrial wilds of Pennsylvania. It is cut off from the rest of the world (referred to as ''the towns'') by forests inhabited by monstrous, mysterious creatures.
An elaborate set of rules and customs has been devised to keep the beasts at bay: there are watchtowers, warning bells and amber flags and robes, and anything red (''the bad color'') must be buried. (These colors may, in the film's allegorical scheme, be intended to evoke the government's color-coded terror alerts.) Domestic animals are sometimes found killed and partly skinned, and now and again the monsters emerge from the shadows to frighten and warn the villagers. They are propitiated with fresh meat and earnest meetings of the village elders, a distinguished group that includes William Hurt, Sigourney Weaver, Brendan Gleeson and Cherry Jones.
Otherwise, life goes on in its normal, old-fashioned storybook way. There are barn dances, weddings and big outdoor meals at tables laden with lovely victuals, all of it filmed in grayish reproduction-antique light by the incomparable Roger Deakins. People speak in a stately, wordy idiom, disdaining contractions and using the subjunctive with breathtaking precision. Mr. Hurt was born to talk this way -- he talks this way in all his movies -- which is no doubt why he was elected (or appointed, or whatever) village elder in chief (or school headmaster, or something). The younger folk have a tougher time of it, in particular Bryce Dallas Howard, who plays Mr. Hurt's blind younger daughter, Ivy.
Ms. Howard, making her movie debut, has enough charm to make her way through some of the script's sillier lines. ''Do you find me too much of a tomboy?'' she asks the moody Lucius Hunt (Joaquin Phoenix). ''I do long to do boy things.'' As, no doubt, does he. So, for that matter, does the village idiot, Noah, played with good-natured hamminess by Adrien Brody. Indeed, the whole village seems to be possessed by barely suppressed yearnings and guilty secrets. These, more than the beasts in the woods, might have been the subject of an interesting, Hardyesque inquiry into small-town life, but Mr. Shyamalan once again uses the psychology of his characters as the ultimate red herring, fooling us into caring more about the people in the movie than he does.
He does, at least, care about the way his movies look, and his disdain for newfangled special effects is refreshing. His mastery of classic suspense-movie framing and cutting is as impressive as ever, and the sound design, which layers James Newton Howard's spooky score with the equally sinister sounds of the forest, is impressive, especially when it evokes Ivy's blindness. At times you do sit up in your chair and crane your neck, as if you could see around the next bend of the story and glimpse what's coming. Then you do see it, and you burst out laughing.
''The Village'' 
~
In his angry new comedy, ''She Hate Me,'' Spike Lee carries his political exasperation beyond outrage into chaos. The carelessness with which he hurls his feelings about hot-button topics onto the screen is the filmmaking equivalent of last-ditch marketing: grab everything in sight, roll it up into a big messy mud ball, and hurl it against the wall, hoping that something sticks.
This feisty New York filmmaker with a nose for tabloid news has always relished playing provocateur and setting brush fires with his rub-your-face-in-it style of riffing off the headlines. Usually his rampages leave behind at least some patches of scorched earth before burning out.
''She Hate Me,'' which rattles on for nearly two and a half hours, is the first of his fiery diatribes that repeatedly fizzles as it goes along.
Lashing out in all directions, Mr. Lee addresses white-collar crime, the Bush administration, AIDS in Africa, the Mafia, Watergate, sex and reproduction, lesbianism and the meaning of family in a disoriented rant that lurches from one subject to the next with little to tie it together.
A sex farce one minute, a crude political skit the next, an imitation ''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington'' harangue the next, ''She Hate Me'' can't maintain its focus long enough to say anything fresh. The boilerplate polemics mouthed by stick-figure characters sound like the beery 3 a.m. debates of a college bull session that has outlasted its usefulness.
The movie begins with a montage of crisp rippling currency that features the face of George W. Bush on a $3 bill. Then it introduces its semihero, Jack Armstrong (Anthony Mackie), a 30-year-old African-American smoothie and vice president of Progeia, a pharmaceutical giant desperate to be the first company to market an AIDS vaccine.
When the Food and Drug Administration withholds its approval, Progeia's saintly chief researcher dives from an office window along with the company's stock. Reviewing the dead man's computer file, Jack learns of corporate dirty deeds, falsified data, shredded documents and stock manipulation.
Confronting his bosses, he is told to keep his mouth shut but decides to turn whistle-blower. Summarily fired, his reputation smeared, his bank account frozen, he's suddenly a nobody, and the movie takes an awkward leap by comparing Jack's misfortune to the plight of Frank Wills, the security guard who reported the Watergate break-in and went on to die in poverty while the conspirators prospered.
Enter Fatima (Kerry Washington), Jack's ex-fiancée, with whom he broke up after catching her in bed with a woman. Showing up with her girlfriend Alex (Dania Ramirez), Fatima offers him $10,000 to impregnate the two of them. Desperate for money, he reluctantly agrees. In short order, with Fatima acting as his agent, his apartment becomes a stud farm for lesbians willing to shell out $10,000 apiece for his seed. Infinitely potent and fertile, Jack takes on four or five women a night, eventually fathering 19 children for happy lesbian couples. His attitude toward his work is comically illustrated with animated sperms bearing his face wriggling toward grinning eggs.
Long after ''She Hate Me'' has exhausted its material, it refuses to give up. In the last interminable third of the movie, Mr. Lee and his screenwriting collaborator, Michael Genet, throw in a lesbian Mafia princess, Simona (Monica Bellucci), whose father, Don Angelo Bonasera (John Turturro), does an extended, tedious parody of Marlon Brando in ''The Godfather.''
The point seems to be that the Mafia's notion of family is kinder and gentler than Progeia's inhuman family values propounded with Orwellian cynicism by its C.E.O., Leland Powell (Woody Harrelson), and his chief lieutenant, Margo Chadwick (Ellen Barkin in a Martha Stewart haircut).
As usual in a Spike Lee film, the sexual politics are muddled. The director can't resist presenting Jack Armstrong as a yuppie version of the black sexual superman. Unveiling his manhood to a group of lesbians, who are the sort of gorgeous, slithery babes seen writhing in rap videos, his show is greeted with oohs and ahs of lustful appreciation.
The movie eventually does a turnabout by giving him pangs of conscience brought on by the disapproval of his morally upstanding family. Jack, we're informed, is not to be confused with the negative stereotype of an African-American man who impregnates women and then disappears. In his heart and soul he, too, is a family man.
Throughout ''She Hate Me'' you can sense Mr. Lee trying to do the right thing. But in spite of itself, the movie supports the adolescent caveman fantasy that a lesbian is really a heterosexual woman who hasn't received proper stud service.
''She Hate Me'' 
~
''Catwoman,'' which opens tomorrow nationwide, achieves something I would not have thought possible. It made me think back fondly on ''Garfield.'' But perhaps that has more to do with my own feline prejudices than with the relative merits of the movies. The two of them, arriving in the same season, present a stark choice. If you like your cats fat and lazy, with a fondness for lasagna and a penchant for sarcasm, ''Garfield'' is the movie for you. If you prefer them sleek and hissing, with whips and leather lingerie, then help yourself to ''Catwoman.'' Really, though, the choice is an even simpler one, between Bill Murray and Halle Berry.
Ms. Berry plays Patience Philips, a frazzled would-be artist who designs advertisements for a big cosmetics company run by the reptilian George Hedare (Lambert Wilson) and his icy wife, Laurel (Sharon Stone). In the course of a frantic day, Patience tries to rescue a mysterious cat that has been stalking her, and is herself saved from falling from a high window by a kindly, studly cop named Tom Lone (Benjamin Bratt).
Later on, Patience overhears some deadly corporate secrets and is bumped off by the Hedares' goons, only to be revived by that enigmatic cat, who performs mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on Patience's waterlogged body and thus endows her with super-human feline powers. Patience soon starts behaving the way that most cats do: sleeping on high shelves, tiptoeing along the back of her sofa and eating tunafish straight out of the can.
You may wonder if she also licks herself clean or leaves dead mice on the welcome mat, but these are matters the film tactfully declines to explore. She does, however, steal a motorcycle, break into a jewelry store (where a robbery is already in progress) and cut her hair using two pairs of scissors at once. Her basketball skills improve enormously.
The explanation for all this, supplied by a zany cat lady (Frances Conroy, best known as Ruth Fisher on ''Six Feet Under''), is that Patience has become a cat woman (which is not the same thing as a cat lady). According to the cat lady, cat women, servants of the Egyptian goddess Bast, date back to ancient times and reappear throughout history. (This lesson is foreshadowed by the opening credits and confirmed by an Internet search for the terms ''cats in history.'') ''Cat women are not contained by the rules of society,'' the cat lady says. This is, wouldn't you know it, ''both a blessing and a curse.'' ''You are a cat woman,'' she tells Patience, stunning the audience. ''Accept it, child.''
And why not? Directed by a Frenchman with the single, not uncatlike name of Pitof, ''Catwoman'' is a howlingly silly, moderately diverting exercise in high, pointless style. Pitof's approach to storytelling is casual; he yawns and stretches over the script, which is a pedestrian piece of committee work in any case.
But the picture, full of moody, oversaturated colors, twisty camera moves and stroboscopic editing, does have a certain decadent visual flair and a louche, sneering sense of humor. Watching it is like paging through a fat European fashion magazine at high speed in the lobby of a sleek hotel. Through the haze of moody color, you can occasionally glimpse the flicker of an idea about female sexuality or the manufacture of beauty, but these themes are ornamental flourishes in the pretty, kinetic emptiness.
Mr. Bratt and Ms. Berry are nice to look at, though the sloppy, hyperactive computer-generated effects may cause some eyestrain. Their romantic scenes together are fairly dull, at least when Patience is being her everyday human self. When she puts on her mask and leather suit (accessorized with diamond-studded claws and a long, snaking whip), it's a whole different scene, and the two of them enact a teasing S-and-M ballet on a backstage catwalk.
The character of Catwoman, definitively embodied by Eartha Kitt in the old ''Batman'' television series and dutifully updated by Michelle Pfeiffer in Tim Burton's ''Batman Returns,'' has always been a camp dominatrix, a persona not entirely suited to Ms. Berry's soft, eager demeanor. She overacts Patience's flaky timidity and then, to compensate, overdoes catwoman's suave self-confidence, swinging her hips and pushing out her lips as if she were trying to attract the amorous attentions of Pepe le Pew.
The feline attribute she most lacks is the one the movie is most desperate to manufacture, which is elegant, graceful cool. Ms. Stone compensates somewhat for this deficit, and the climactic battle between Laurel and Patience is sure to thrill anyone who likes to see a good -- forgive me, there's no other word -- catfight.
Like ''Garfield,'' ''Catwoman'' is really a parody of catitude, offering glib mockery of a domestic species notorious for its pride and hauteur. It exhibits nothing like the sympathy that ''Spider-Man'' brings to the melancholy arachnid soul, or the insight that ''Shrek 2'' offers into donkey neurosis. But the cats of the world will get over this insult. Most likely by sleeping through it.
''Catwoman'' 
~
The only real touch of class in ''Touch of Pink,'' a rickety little romantic comedy whose title riffs on the 1962 movie ''That Touch of Mink,'' is Kyle MacLachlan's dead-on impersonation of Cary Grant. Lounging around in a paisley dressing gown, dropping pallid witticisms in Grant's signature staccato style with just the right accent, Mr. MacLachlan finds an easy balance between affectionate imitation and amusing parody.
Actually, Mr. MacLachlan isn't playing the real-life actor but his pesky spirit. That ghost materializes whenever Alim (Jimi Mistry), the troubled young protagonist who works as a still photographer on movie sets, needs some moral support; that's most of the time.
Although Grant, a gruff but friendly Hollywood legend who changes into a ''Gunga Din'' outfit late in the movie, is Alim's professed role model, none of his polish seems to have rubbed off on either Alim or the actor playing him. Blocky and charisma-free, Mr. Mistry's Alim mopes through the movie, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, wearing an unbecoming frown.
Except for the piquant garnish of Mr. MacLachlan, the movie, written and directed by Ian Iqbal Rashid, is barely a cut above an amateur production. The attempts at humor fizzle, and the performances are wooden and overstated.
It is also the latest manifestation of an already stale sub-subgenre: the multicultural romance in which a gay couple of mixed ethnicity try to conceal their relationship from tradition-bound relatives who assume that the lovers are heterosexual roommates.
Ang Lee's ''Wedding Banquet,'' by far the best movie to cover the same territory, paired a Taiwanese and an American, residing in New York as live-in lovers, who entertain beloved but scary relatives from abroad. In ''Touch of Pink,'' Alim, a Canadian-born South Asian Muslim, is nestling in London with Giles (Kristen Holden-Ried), an alarmingly cheery Briton with a resemblance to the young Bert Lahr, when Alim's mother, Nuru (Suleka Mathew), pays a visit. As Alim stumbles to find the words to tell her the truth about his relationship, Giles's sister, Delia (Liisa Repo-Martell), is briefly enlisted to play a bogus fiancée.
Nuru's mission is to persuade her son to return to Canada to attend the wedding of his cousin and childhood friend, Khaled (Raoul Bhaneja), a dentist. Family pressures are mounting for Alim to choose his own bride and give Nuru the grandchildren she feels she deserves. Eventually, everyone collides in Toronto, where the story delivers one last surprising wrinkle. Mr. MacLachlan's blithe spirit, who goes along for the ride, hangs out in doorways, dispensing limp wisecracks while observing the festivities.
By inserting brief clips from Grant's movies to illustrate obvious parallels, the movie does itself a disservice. A flash from ''Suspicion'' or ''An Affair to Remember'' or ''The Philadelphia Story'' makes you long to flee the theater and rent one of the classics it has the audacity to throw in as footnotes.
''Touch of Pink'' 
~
Following in the sasquatchian footsteps of Hollywood, Bollywood is also going global. The Hindi-language film industry, based in what was once called Bombay and is now Mumbai (somehow, Mumbywood seems unlikely to catch on as a blanket term for the business), has followed the Indian diaspora and now produces films in the United States as well, and in this case largely in English.
''Flavors,'' written and directed by Raj Nidimoru and Krishna DK, was shot and is set mostly in New Jersey, where the thoroughly Americanized Rad (Anupam Mittal) is about to be married to his tall, blond American fiancée (Jicky Schnee). Rad's tradition-minded parents, arriving from the old country for the big event, are at first appalled by American customs like women smoking on the street, but before too long they are happily adopting American folkways, including wearing promotional T-shirts and going for aimless walks along empty suburban streets.
The wedding is a device to bring together several subplots. Kartik (Reef Karim) invites his long-distance phone pal, Rachna (Pooja Kumar, now on Broadway in ''Bombay Dreams''), to fly in as his guest for the wedding, hoping their relationship will develop into something more. Sangita (Sireesha Katragadda) is a lonely newlywed whose husband, Nikhil (Gaurang Vyas), is distracted by problems at work. And Candy (Rishma Malik) is a den mother to three unemployed computer programmers who pass their time drinking beer and pining for romance.
The picture is bright, good-spirited and blissfully short for Bollywood, at a mere 118 minutes. The conflicts all center on that classic theme of immigrant cinema -- homegrown, traditional values versus the liberal mores of the new country -- and are resolved with grace, humor and very few surprises. But Bollywood fans will be disappointed by the lack of the wonderfully demented musical numbers that are the Hindi cinema's defining characteristic. Such things, it seems, are not globalizable.
''Flavors'' opens today in New York, New Jersey, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Francisco, Atlanta, Dallas, Houston, Detroit, Washington, Toronto and Vancouver, British Columbia.
FLAVORS
Written and directed by Raj Nidimoru and Krishna DK; director of photography, Dave Isern; edited by Frank Reynolds; music by Mahesh Shankar and Leslie Lewis; production designer, Tushar Unadkat; produced by Anupam Mittal, Mr. Nidimoru and Krishna DK; released by Net Effect Media. Running time: 118 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Pooja Kumar (Rachna), Reef Karim (Kartik), Bharati Achrekar (Mom), Anjan Srivastava (Dad), Anupam Mittal (Rad), Jicky Schnee (Jenni), Sireesha Katragadda (Sangita), Gaurang Vyas (Nikhil) and Rishma Malik (Candy).

~
If adolescent rebellion were channeled toward a useful cause, the tweener consumers for ''A Cinderella Story'' and the recent ''Sleepover'' would march to Hollywood en masse to protest the cynicism, sloppiness and condescension of the toxic fantasies being hurled at them.
Because ''A Cinderella Story,'' which opens today nationwide, stars the talent-challenged teenage goddess Hilary Duff, it will probably gain more notice than ''Sleepover,'' which bombed at the box office in its opening weekend. But ''A Cinderella Story'' is even worse, crudely relocating that classic fairy tale to the San Fernando Valley: ''my kingdom,'' as its modern-day Cinderella, Samantha (Hilary Duff), calls it in her introductory monologue.
The movie strains to bend the fairy tale to accommodate another coarse high school comedy of air-headed teenage vixens ganging up on a meek little angel. Samantha, or ''Diner Girl,'' as she's jeeringly called in her tormenters' abrasive, mean-spirited harangues, is a pariah because she drives a battered old car and toils like a slave in her evil stepmother's hideous, pink-painted diner.
That stepmother, Fiona, who suggests a nightmarish hybrid of Zsa Zsa Gabor and Tammy Faye Bakker, in a perpetually foul mood, is a greasy-looking sexpot manquée whose comic potential largely eludes the usually funny Jennifer Coolidge. A Botox- and liposuction-obsessed slob who feasts night and day on salmon and waddles about in fur-trimmed dresses, Fiona announces her stupidity by declaring that Norwegians come from Norwegia. Her poisonous daughters, Gabriella (Andrea Avery) and Brianna (Madeline Zima), who force Samantha to do their homework, are squabbling twins who fly at each other's throats whenever Samantha is not around to abuse.
The fairy godmother. Rhonda (Regina King), is the salty, good-hearted African-American manager of Fiona's diner. She lends Samantha her unused wedding dress on the night of the Halloween ball at which our Cinderella makes her grand entrance, a dream in white lace. The film's resident Prince Charming, Austin Ames (Chad Michael Murray), who falls under her spell, is the courtly captain of the football team and student council president. He, too, is persecuted at home. Against the wishes of his father, who expects him to join the family's car-wash business, he dreams of fleeing to Princeton.
Outside school, Cinderella and the Prince have already fallen in cyber-love. The sweethearts spend hours billing and cooing via instant messages on the Internet, where Samantha goes by the name of ''Princeton Girl'' but refuses to divulge her true identity. Princeton, you see, is the movie's equivalent of Happily Ever After. And Austin, by the way, isn't really a dumb jock but a closet poet who quotes Tennyson.
Even for a fairy tale, ''A Cinderella Story,'' directed by Mark Rosman from a screenplay by Leigh Dunlap, fails to make sense. In an environment where looks are everything, no one notices that Samantha is far and away the prettiest girl in high school. Only a blind person could fail to guess the Girl in White's identity when she makes her entrance wearing a tiny white mask. And a dropped cellphone as a substitute for a glass slipper simply will not do.
Hollywood be warned: teenagers hate being taken for fools.
''A Cinderella Story'' 
~
The sight of surfers gracefully navigating 50-foot waves, then being swallowed into the surge only to emerge in triumph is a surefire thrill that exerts the same visceral tug as watching storm chasers drive toward tornados. These primal confrontations may seem crazy, but even vicariously you can feel how their rushes of adrenaline can be addictive.
Because the waves get progressively higher in ''Riding Giants,'' Stacy Peralta's historical surfing documentary, some of that thrill is sustained throughout this overlong but entertaining movie. Just when you think the sport's daredevil pioneers have met an oceanic swell that can't be conquered, another barrier is breached.
For all its excitement, Mr. Peralta's follow-up to his skateboarding movie ''Dogtown and Z-Boys'' lacks the quirky, personal touch of its forerunner. ''Dogtown,'' narrated by Sean Penn, evoked the punkish, bad-boy spirit of early skateboarding, which came out of surfing and was developed largely by alienated youths from poor or working-class backgrounds in southern California.
''Riding Giants,'' which opens today in New York, has its share of cheek, but it is a more formal survey of a sport that is already well documented, most recently in Dana Brown's documentary ''Step Into Liquid.'' At its best, in the introductory animated mini-history ''1,000 Years of Surfing in Two Minutes or Less,'' it sardonically traces surfing from its Polynesian roots through its suppression by Christian missionaries to its 20th-century resurgence.
The history of surfing, one commentator remarks, can be divided into eras: before and after ''Gidget.'' If the excerpts from early-1960's beach movies that made the sport popular are astonishing in their naïveté and phoniness, these movies still did the job of turning a cult activity into a mainstream sport.
The closer the movie draws to the present, the more concentrated is its attention to specific innovators and the quest to find the biggest, scariest wave. That quest went hand in hand with the redesign of surfboards. It carried the adventurers to Hawaii, where they discovered the most challenging waves yet at Waimea Bay. The Hawaiian exploits of the surfing legend Greg Noll, who appears in the film, are recounted with a mystical fervor.
In addition to Mr. Noll, the movie devotes a chapter to Jeff Clark, who surfed the rocky, bone-chilling Maverick's Beach near San Francisco alone for 15 years before it became popular. The final chapter belongs to Laird Hamilton, the pioneer of tow-in surfing, which enables surfers to ride waves 60 or more feet high. Mr. Hamilton is acknowledged as the foremost big-wave rider, and spectacular scenes of his feats filmed from jet skis and helicopters show him to be a kind of physical genius, continually improvising new approaches to challenges the moment they arise.
We've clearly come a long way from ''The Endless Summer,'' the 1966 documentary by Bruce Brown that followed two surfers around the world in search of ''the perfect wave.'' Focused on beauty, grace and surfing long waves rather than on mastering high ones, they embraced values that were different from those of the adventurers pushing the limits in ''Riding Giants.'' In today's age of bigger-is-better, facing your fear is what really matters.
''Riding Giants'' 
~
How young do you have to be before you want to be older? With ''Sleepover,'' a wispy pubescent comedy, Hollywood, that self-appointed guardian of our national youth obsession, has come up with a number: 14. That is the excruciating tweener moment, the desperate summer between junior high and high school, the movie declares, when you're too young to have teenage fun but not too young to crave it. And what is fun? The usual: scoring hotties and contemplating hookups without a punishing curfew and parents who just don't understand.
If you're a 14-year-old girl, alas, you can only dream of being Cinderella. Your body hasn't quite caught up with your fantasies. One solution might be to fake it: borrow your mother's red dress, don sunglasses and flash some cleavage. But beware: your hot Internet date might turn out to be your nerdy junior high school principal.
This is what happens to Julie (Alexa Vega), the movie's resourceful young heroine, who is smart enough to plan ahead. When high school begins, she and her friends will have stolen an advantage if they can have lunch in the elite nook by the school fountain and look down contemptuously on the scum forced to sit next to the dumpster. After high school, it's downhill. Just ask Julie's older brother, Ren (Sam Huntington), who announces that college is a drag.
So goes the world view of ''Sleepover,'' which opens today nationwide, and if you're honest with yourself, that view may be uncomfortably familiar. When you're trapped in the adolescent jungle, social status is everything. Julie and three squealy gal pals square off against the in-group of snooty alpha girls in a competitive scavenger hunt whose winners will commandeer that elite lunchtime nook. Winning involves stealing the boxer shorts of a high school dreamboat, Steve (Sean Faris); posing as an underwear model; making an online date with a stranger; and being the first to possess a shiny cardboard crown.
What makes Julie and her friends the underdogs is that these tasks are to be accomplished on the night of a sleepover in which Julie's dad (Jeff Garlin) plays watchdog, while her mother (Jane Lynch) takes the night off. But escape is still possible by climbing out a window onto a rose trellis and tooling around in a tiny electric car.
The movie, directed by Joe Nussbaum from a screenplay by Elisa Bell, has many of the same ingredients as a John Hughes teenage comedy but scaled to a lower age group and given a thick gloss of farce. On its own terms, I suppose, it is cheery enough as it searches for a wobbly balance between ''Mean Girls'' edge and princessy ick.
Apart from exalting Julie's pluck, the movie promotes the retrograde Tarzan-and-Jane climate of teenage sexual etiquette, reaching its nadir in a scene in which a boy announces, ''Cat fight!,'' and two girls make fools of themselves by clawing at each other's hair. That's the real ick in ''Sleepover,'' an example of moviemaking as niche marketing.
''Sleepover'' 
~
''King Arthur,'' which opens today nationwide, claims to be ''the untold true story that inspired the legend.'' In the name of accuracy, apparently, some familiar legendary elements have been altered or dropped altogether. Merlin (Stephen Dillane), it turns out, was not a magician but the shadowy leader of the Woads, a guerrilla army of Pictish freedom fighters with stringy hair, blue faces and tattooed bodies. Since the knights of the Round Table are stubbornly pagan (and skeptical of their leader's Christianity, which is wobbly at best), they are not about to go off in search of the Holy Grail. And though Lancelot (Ioan Gruffudd) at one point casts a smoldering glance in the direction of Guinevere (Keira Knightley), nothing more comes of the mythic triangle of king, queen and knight. Lancelot, in any case, is more of a fighter than a lover, and so, in spite of an obligatory cuddle with Arthur on the night before the big battle, is Guinevere.
Historians will debate the veracity of all this, assuming they have nothing better to do. But it will be clear to most moviegoers that this true story, far from being untold, was inspired by at least a half-dozen previous movies, from ''The Seven Samurai'' to ''Braveheart.''
David Franzoni, the screenwriter, also wrote ''Gladiator,'' and Clive Owen's Arthur, like Russell Crowe's Maximus, both faithfully serves the Roman empire and turns against its authoritarian abuses. He and his knights are sent on a rescue mission that recalls the one undertaken by Bruce Willis in ''Tears of the Sun,'' the previous movie directed by Antoine Fuqua, who directed ''King Arthur.''
Really, though, originality is not the point of this movie, any more than historical verisimilitude is. It is a blunt, glowering B picture, shot in murky fog and battlefield smoke, full of silly-sounding pomposity and swollen music (courtesy of the prolifically bombastic Hans Zimmer). The combat scenes, though boisterous and brutal, are no more coherent than the story, which requires almost as much exposition as the last ''Star Wars'' movie. Luckily there is an element of broad, brawny camp that prevents ''King Arthur'' from being a complete drag.
In this version Arthur's knights are a ragged band of foreign conscripts stationed in the shadow of Hadrian's Wall, where they fight an occasional skirmish with the pesky Woads, who gyre and gimble in the wabe. Arthur's mixed parentage -- he is half Roman and half British -- results in an identity crisis as he simultaneously grows disillusioned with the corruption and cruelty of Rome and succumbs to Guinevere's Woady charms.
Arthur's men, for reasons efficiently explained in the first 10 minutes of the movie, are required to serve the empire for 15 years. They complain about the English weather, which was even drearier back in the fifth century, but their devotion to Arthur is absolute. Although they have earned their freedom, the knights are sent off on one last mission, which acquaints them with both the evils committed in the name of Rome and its church, and with the threat of the Saxon invaders, who are waging a vicious war of conquest with armor-piercing arrows and the scariest blond hair extensions since ''White Chicks.''
Cerdic, the Saxon leader, is played by Stellan Skarsgard, whose halting, throaty delivery and gleefully hammy villainy confirm his stature as the Swedish Christopher Walken. Cerdic's lieutenant is his son Cynric (Til Schweiger), who sports a spiffy plaited soul patch and a slightly different accent, and who leads the Saxons into a battle on the ice that is the film's most original and satisfying set piece. The rest of it is mostly grunting, roaring and hacking, conducted by some fine, cheerfully slumming actors, notably Ray Winstone (as a lusty, cantankerous knight named Bors) and Mads Mikkelsen (as the enigmatic Tristan).
Arthur, who will somehow establish freedom for England by being declared its king, is a worrier as well as a warrior, and Mr. Owen brings a certain wariness to the role, as if he were, like his character, reluctant to commit the full force of his charisma to a cause he doesn't quite understand. Ms. Knightley, on the other hand, throws herself bodily into every scene, sighing her way through the gauzy love-making montage and appearing at the climactic battle the next morning in face paint and a smashing leather combat brassiere, hurling herself at the Saxon invaders with full-throated Woad rage.
''King Arthur'' 
~
Near the end of ''De-Lovely,'' the lethally inert new cinematic portrait of Cole Porter, the composer (Kevin Kline) and his wife, Linda (Ashley Judd), attend a private screening in Los Angeles of ''Night and Day,'' Porter's notoriously inaccurate, sugar-coated but commercially successful 1946 screen biography. After the blissful final clinch of Cary Grant and Alexis Smith in a movie that exalts the Porters' regulation Hollywood-perfect union, ''De-Lovely'' shows the composer turning to his wife and remarking, ''If I can survive this, I can survive anything.''
But I wonder if Porter, who died in 1964, could have survived ''De-Lovely,'' a movie so lifeless and drained of genuine joie de vivre it makes you long for the largely fictional earlier film. ''Night and Day,'' after all, starred Cary Grant. When you think about it, what man in his right mind wouldn't be flattered by having Grant as his screen alter-ego? I seriously question whether watching the suave, handsome actor in his prime was an embarrassment that the physically unglamorous Porter felt he had to survive.
''Night and Day'' at least had a sense of style. It may be factually absurd, but it glides along like a Porter song -- say, ''Begin the Beguine.'' Watching ''De-Lovely,'' which unfolds as a bumpy, muddled ''This Is Your Life'' series of confusing, overcrowded tableaus, you have the creepy sense of watching adult children (with the singular exception of Mr. Kline, who can surmount any disaster) dressed up in period costume at a school pageant. Ms. Judd's performance, in particular, is clueless as to style. She seems to imagine that tilting her chin up to snob level, narrowing her eyes and maintaining precise elocution is all it takes to evoke class.
The advance publicity for ''De-Lovely,'' which opens today nationwide, has gone out of its way to pat the movie on the back for its supposed candor. True, this biography, directed by Irwin Winkler, from an appallingly stilted screenplay by Jay Cocks, differs from its forerunner by acknowledging Porter's homosexuality. But its attitude toward sex is, in a word, dainty.
Coyly seductive glances exchanged between men across a room are not the same as the torrid encounters and fantasies of those encounters that fueled Porter's songs. The heat in a film about the man who wrote ''Too Darn Hot'' remains a steady, air-conditioned 68 degrees. The most lascivious scene is a howlingly ridiculous moment when Porter's pal and partner in after-hours adventure, Monty Woolley (Allan Corduner), jumps out of the horse-drawn carriage taking the two of them through Central Park at night and announces with a neon leer that he is going for a walk in the Ramble.
Porter's incandescent love songs voiced an obsessive sexual romanticism. His lyrics, packed with juicy double-entendres, dripped with eroticism and a connoisseur's appreciation of the erotic life and its roller-coaster peaks and valleys. ''De-Lovely'' simply cannot imagine a world before the age of Oprah and Dr. Phil, before television decreed that sexual gratification and maintaining a hot body were the most important things in life. It can't imagine a wealthy, sophisticated couple marrying for friendship and social advantage without that arrangement involving torment and guilt over its lack of sex.
A scene in the new movie in which a contrite Porter tells his wife that he'll try to stop seeing men and be faithful stands out as a moment of especially meretricious psychodrama. And in making much of Linda's miscarriage, the movie implies Porter was more sexually ambiguous than, by most accounts, he actually was.
The episodes in Porter's life are constructed around a painfully contrived framing device. The depressed, elderly Porter, alone in his suite in the Waldorf Towers near the end of his life, is visited by a mysterious stranger (could it be the Angel of Death?) named Gabe (Jonathan Pryce) who transports him to an empty theater where Gabe is overseeing a stage show of Porter's life. From Paris in the 1920's, the movie jumps to Venice, Los Angeles, Connecticut and New York. Feeble screen parodies of Irving Berlin and Louis B. Mayer appear and vanish. And two of Porter's closest friends, Gerald and Sara Murphy, the ur-Jazz Age couple, hang around in the background. They're so vapid that when one of their children dies, you have to strain your memory to figure out the reason for Porter's grief.
The composer's carefree years ended abruptly in 1937 when a riding accident fractured both his legs and left him in acute pain for the rest of his life. But he continued to be productive, turning out his masterpiece, ''Kiss Me Kate,'' in 1948. In 1958 (four years after Linda's death from emphysema), the amputation of his right leg broke his spirit, and he spent his last six years in a stony depression, dulled by drugs and alcohol.
Mr. Kline, who has always played sexual ambiguity with a special lightness, subtlety and understanding, faces off heroically against the wooden dialogue. And the scenes of the embittered composer in his final years are the movie's most emotionally resonant.
Two dozen Porter songs are glossed by contemporary singers like Elvis Costello (''Let's Misbehave''), Alanis Morissette (''Let's Do It, Let's Fall in Love''), Sheryl Crow (a weird minor-key version of ''Begin the Beguine'') and Diana Krall (''Just One of Those Things''). If they're not awful, these labored, self-conscious interpretations are undercut by flimsy period arrangements.
It didn't have to be like this. In their highly stylized ways, ''All That Jazz'' (Bob Fosse's morbidly manic screen autobiography), Ken Russell's surreal portraits of composers or any of Federico Fellini's libidinous self-explorations have delved deeply into the muck of artistic creativity. Sadly, the daring and imagination required to go below the surface are nowhere to be found in ''De-Lovely.''
''De-Lovely'' 
~
Wayne Hayes (Robert Redford) is a high-flying car-rental magnate. Now, somewhere in his movie-star 60's (at worst he looks like a squinty 50-year-old whose contact lenses are giving him trouble), Wayne is looking forward to a peaceful retirement with his supportive wife of several decades, Eileen (Helen Mirren).
But one morning as Wayne pulls out of the driveway of his plush Pittsburgh estate, he finds a nervous, badly dressed man waiting for him. He's Arnold Mack (Willem Dafoe), a disgruntled former employee who forces his way into Wayne's car and kidnaps him at gunpoint.
At this juncture ''The Clearing,'' Pieter Jan Brugge's independent feature, goes off in two different, asynchronous directions. Arnold forces Wayne to drive to a remote region somewhere in the Great Smoky Mountains, where he makes him get out and continue on foot. They are to hike to a mountaintop cabin where, Arnold tells Wayne, his confederates will be waiting and Wayne will be held until his wife delivers a whopping ransom.
Along the protracted journey, Arnold and Wayne have plenty of opportunity to exchange their views on opportunity in America. Arnold, a henpecked loser, believes that Wayne has had all the advantages; Wayne argues that he owes his success to no one but himself and that Arnold could have achieved everything that he has, if only he'd had the intestinal fortitude.
Wayne and Arnold's hike occupies, perhaps, 10 or 12 hours of narrative time; their journey goes from early morning to late evening. But Mr. Brugge has also initiated another narrative thread, one that plays out over several days as the F.B.I., led by an agent named Ray Fuller (Matt Craven), establishes its crisis center in the Hayes home while Eileen and the couple's two grown children, Tim (Alessandro Nivola) and Jill (Melissa Sagemiller), struggle with the horror of the situation.
Cutting between the two plotlines as if they were taking place simultaneously, Mr. Brugge, who directed the film from a screenplay by Justin Haythe, establishes a series of too-tidy parallels. As Arnold forces Wayne to realize that he is not the paragon of corporate virtue he would like to believe he is, so Eileen discovers that Wayne is not the ideal husband -- he has continued his adulterous relationship with a woman (Wendy Crewson) even though he told Eileen that he broke it off long ago.
Mr. Brugge is making his first film as a director after a career as a producer, and the plot device suggests one of his previous projects, the American remake of the Dutch thriller ''The Vanishing.'' But what thrills there are in ''The Clearing,'' which opens nationwide today, are minor and beside the point, which is apparently to create a classy art-house melodrama on the model of ''In the Bedroom'' (or perhaps a crime-scene remake of Mr. Redford's own agonizing family melodrama, ''Ordinary People'').
The filmmaker constantly signals his intentions (the simple casting of high-end, serious actors like Ms. Mirren and Mr. Dafoe is already a statement of intent and, for many critics, proof of accomplishment) while neglecting his dramatic responsibilities. Just about any episode of ''60 Minutes'' will contain a more pointed and dramatically focused portrait of corporate corruption, and just about any daytime television serial would bring the adultery plot to a much more satisfying boil.
But the idea here is not to create too much wretched excess, but to remain within the neat columns and muted feelings of a New Yorker short story. Taste is everything, from the faultless production design of the Hayes household to the restrained, actorly expressions of grief and concern. Mr. Brugge has perhaps succeeded in avoiding vulgar melodrama, but he has hit on something far worse -- a bloodless melodrama, with bottled water running in its veins.
''The Clearing'' has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for a few bursts of strong language.
THE CLEARING
Directed by Pieter Jan Brugge; written by Justin Haythe, based on a story by Mr. Brugge and Mr. Haythe; director of photography, Denis Lenoir; edited by Kevin Tent; music by Craig Armstrong; production designer, Chris Gorak; produced by Mr. Brugge, Palmer West and Jonah Smith; released by Fox Searchlight Pictures. Running time: 91 minutes. This film 
~
Since a corporation is legally defined as a person, it makes some sense to ask what kind of person a corporation might be. The answer offered by ''The Corporation,'' a smart, brooding documentary directed by Mark Achbar and Jennifer Abbott, is: not a very nice one.
The film, which opens at Film Forum today, half-mockingly offers a psychiatric diagnosis based on a list of abuses that arise from the relentless pursuit of profit. The point is not that individual companies pollute the environment, hurt animals, exploit workers and commit accounting fraud, but that such outrages are a result of the essential personality traits of the corporate life form. These behaviors are symptoms arising from a list of pathologies that includes ''disregard for the well-being of others,'' ''inability to form lasting relationships'' and ''deceitfulness.'' A psychiatrist who has advised the F.B.I. declares that the corporation has ''all the characteristics of a prototypical psychopath.''
This scary diagnosis, backed up by sinister soundtrack music, is supported by talking-head testimony from activists, a few C.E.O.'s and scholars (including Noam Chomsky, the subject of Mr. Achbar's 1992 film, ''Manufacturing Consent,'' with Peter Wintonick as co-director). ''The Corporation,'' based on a book by the Canadian law professor Joel Bakan, is divided into cutely titled chapters (''Democracy Ltd.,'' ''Boundary Issues'') that link particular cases of capitalist misbehavior with larger issues. The structure is a bit unwieldy: some of the case studies, fascinating though they are, bog down the main argument in unassimilable details, while the argument itself sometimes threatens to float away into abstraction.
But the film's formal inelegance is a sign of its seriousness, and also of the complexity of its chosen subject. The topic, after all, is intricate and global, and Mr. Achbar and Ms. Abbott address it with spiky, dogged intelligence, if also with hectoring persistence. Corporate power is at once self-evident and elusive, mundane and esoteric, aggressive and insinuating. In the view of the filmmakers and most of their interview subjects, it is always bad and never to be trusted. The imperative to expand makes the corporation a fundamentally predatory being, gobbling up everything in its path -- natural resources, populations of potential laborers and consumers, public spaces and private aspirations -- without conscience or accountability.
In other words, ''The Corporation'' is a monster movie, and nobody, faced with so much alarming testimony, would want to defend Godzilla as he smashes buildings and tramples streetcars. But like other, less sophisticated efforts to articulate a comprehensive anticorporate ideology, this movie occasionally ensnares itself in contradictions it does not quite acknowledge.
One of the most basic of these is raised by the conceit of treating the corporation as a mental patient: is there a cure? Sometimes the film seems to suggest that there is, as when antisweatshop activists shame the Gap into changing its overseas labor practices, or when the chief executive of a carpet company becomes an advocate of sustainable manufacturing and environmental responsibility. But at other points, such reforms are viewed skeptically as instances of co-optation and public-relations spin.
One section of the film examines the historical links between various companies and mid-20th-century fascism, which are used to support a broader claim that modern consumer capitalism is, at bottom, an oppressive system of authority. ''Is it narcissism that impels them to seek their reflection in the regimented structures of fascist regimes?'' the voice-over narration wonders.
Well, maybe. But what is missing from ''The Corporation'' is any recognition that capitalism survives at least as much on seduction as on coercion, and that it has flourished not simply by means of chicanery and domination but by extending, and often fulfilling, promises of freedom, creativity and individual choice.
Mr. Chomsky grimly complains that the system makes ''people into mindless consumers of things they do not want,'' but this analysis, while not exactly inaccurate, feels a bit incomplete. Glancing up from my laptop at the mess of sneakers, CD's, half-eaten snack foods and other useless products that surround me, I have to admit that the shoe fits. But then again, it's a comfortable shoe, it looks nice, and I got it on sale.
It may sound strange to say this about a left-wing documentary, but ''The Corporation'' might have benefited from a bit more Marxism. Marx, among the first to identify the malign features of capitalism, was also a persuasive analyst of its dynamism, its progressiveness and its corrosive effect on older forms of political and cultural authority. ''The Corporation'' is a dense, complicated and thought-provoking film, but it simplifies its title character.
THE CORPORATION
Directed by Mark Achbar and Jennifer Abbott; written by Joel Bakan, based on his book ''The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power,'' with narration written by Harold Crooks and Mr. Achbar; edited by Ms. Abbott; music by Leonard J. Paul; produced by Mr. Achbar and Bart Simpson; released by Zeitgeist Films. At Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village. Running time: 145 minutes. This film is not rated.

~
Deep in the soul of the most ferocious tiger there is a purring pussycat struggling to get out. That's the cuddly anthropomorphic premise of ''Two Brothers,'' a family-friendly movie made for the same audience that likes to imagine talking animals, although none of the beasts in ''Two Brothers'' converse in anything but expressive roars.
And who better to coax this gentle mewing creature out of its savage lair than a fearless, wide-eyed little boy? In the story, set somewhere in French Indochina in the 1920's, Raoul (Freddie Highmore), the young son of the local French administrator, stubbornly refuses to believe that his pet tiger cub, having tasted blood, might pose a danger.
To demonstrate the notion that once a pussycat, always a pussycat, ''Two Brothers'' offers a pair of matched felines in the person of twin tigers, one shy, the other bold. Taken into captivity separately as cubs, they meet as adults in an amphitheater where they are expected to fight each other to the death.
The brothers, Kumal and Sangha, are given top billing in the movie and deserve it. The relationship of Sangha and Raoul, who acquires him as a baby, exemplifies a cozy animal-human togetherness that the movie suggests can be experienced only by innocent children. Their mutual understanding is so touching that the movie's ranking marauder, a treasure-seeking British big game hunter, Aidan McRory (Guy Pearce), considers abandoning his rapacious ways and putting down his rifle.
Yes, it's all terribly hokey. But once you accept the premise as a conceit that allows the director, Jean-Jacques Annaud, to offer an intimate, utopian vision of the animal kingdom, ''Two Brothers'' succeeds as an inspirational pastorale and passionate moral brief for animal rights and preservation. It also inveighs unequivocally against one culture's looting of another's historical treasures.
''Two Brothers,'' which opens today nationwide, isn't as emotionally gripping as Mr. Annaud's much-loved 1988 film, ''The Bear.'' But when it concentrates on its animal stars (each played by several tigers), it remains on solid ground. In the early scenes McRory is coldly supervising a native crew (the movie was filmed in Cambodia and Thailand) as it dynamites a precious Buddhist statue from its pedestal and prepares it for shipping abroad. The movie admires the beauty of the jungle and its ancient treasures half-buried in the foliage as much as it exalts the tigers who romp through this primitive paradise.
It is at its weakest when piecing together a rickety, half-hearted subplot involving Normandin (Jean-Claude Dreyfus), the greedy, spluttering administrator who nurtures fantasies of tourism, and a spoiled local prince (Oanh Nguyen) feebly trying to follow in the footsteps of his noble father. The screenplay, written by Mr. Annaud with Alain Godard, even dabbles in the notion of a romance between Aidan and his Asian translator (Mai Anh Le) and then apparently thinks better of it. These scenes are, in a word, deadly.
In between the dull patches the movie tells the parallel stories of Kumal and Sangha, beginning with blissful childhood frolics amid the ancient statuary. That idyll ends when Aidan shoots their father and takes Kumal into captivity, seducing him with sugar candies. In the most heart-rending moment, Kumal's mother pursues the truck carrying him away and leaps on top of it, in one last desperate gesture.
Kumal is sold to a circus run by a brute (Vincent Scarito) but resists being trained to jump through flaming hoops. Sangha is given to Raoul but is sent away after wreaking destruction in the house and seriously wounding the family dog.
Mr. Annaud makes no bones about his vision of humans as ranking near the bottom of the moral pecking order. The beasts are innocent, and the humans who prey on them, especially those who train them for circus work, are selfish, greedy, vicious exploiters. In deference to children, the movie offers none of the hard truths of adult nature films in which the ruthless law of the jungle, of predators and prey, is played out in full view. The carnage is minimal. It would rather dream a child's storybook fantasy of a peaceable kingdom where all creatures great and small, or at least the enlightened ones, share a gentle understanding.
''Two Brothers'' 
~
Young love -- the old-fashioned kind that flourished before the age of the hook-up -- has always been one of the most challenging emotions to portray on the screen with any specificity. Beyond the smooches, sighs, and adoring glances, how do you convey the reality of a shared, private paradise?
In the strongest scenes of ''The Notebook,'' the screen adaptation of Nicholas Sparks's treacly best seller, Ryan Gosling and Rachel McAdams break through the barrier to evoke high-strung, slightly crazed teenagers plunging headlong into first love. It is passion that begins in playfulness. Their performances are so spontaneous and combustible that you quickly identify with the reckless sweethearts, who embody an innocence that has all but vanished from American teenage life. And against your better judgment, you root for the pair to beat the odds against them.
The romantic drama, directed by Nick Cassavetes from a screenplay by Jeremy Leven and adapted by Jan Sardi from the novel, opens today nationwide. It is told in flashback as Duke (James Garner), a garrulous, ailing old codger in a comfortable nursing home, reads aloud excerpts of a love story to Allie Calhoun (Gena Rowlands), a patient suffering from Alzheimer's. She is so smitten with the 1940's tale of Noah (Mr. Gosling), a poor Southern boy who works in a lumberyard, and his wealthy girlfriend, also named Allie (Ms. McAdams), that for brief intervals his readings jog her blurred memory into focus.
As the movie seesaws between Seabrook, N.C., in the summer of 1940, when Noah and Allie meet at a fairground, and the present, it is deliberately (and annoyingly) coy as to who these oldsters might be. Gosh, could they be the same young lovers six decades later?
Mr. Garner and Ms. Rowlands are wonderful actors, but Mr. Garner, in particular, plays ''old'' with a hammy avuncularity that sugarcoats his character with a glaze of nostalgia. His performance reinforces the impression that in Hollywood, old age is even more difficult to depict with real honesty than young love. Ms. Rowlands's Allie is quieter and sadder, but she looks too well-preserved for a woman in her condition, and as the story leaps back and forth, the movie veers between unbleached sugar and artificial sweetener.
When Noah meets Allie, he is so desperate to impress her that he hangs on the rungs of a Ferris wheel and threatens to jump if she won't go out with him. Even at the beginning, Mr. Gosling's performance emphasizes Noah's slightly creepy streak of fanaticism. After the lovers have separated, he withdraws into himself, grows a beard, and with a small inheritance from his poetry-loving father (Sam Shepard), a Walt Whitman fan, he converts the rotting old mansion he once dreamed of sharing with Allie into the showplace he promised to build for her. He also serves in World War II, where he sees his best friend die in the Battle of the Bulge.
Ms. McAdams, who played the alpha queen in ''Mean Girls,'' matches Mr. Gosling's Noah in idiosyncratic verve. Impulsive, giggly and combative, she exudes the air of a careless rich girl bursting out of a bubble, until the moment her stern, watchful mother, Anne (Joan Allen), puts her foot down and ends the relationship.
The scenes between the young lovers confronting adult authority have the same seething tension and lurking hysteria that the young Warren Beatty and Natalie Wood brought more than 40 years ago to their roles in ''Splendor in the Grass.'' The power of Ms. Allen's performance comes out of understatement. Impeccably coiffed and outfitted, barely moving her tight lips, she projects the full emotional depth of composure under siege.
Like most movies that span many decades, chapters of ''The Notebook'' seem scrunched together. The war, in particular, passes in a flash. It is as a nurse's aide that Allie meets Lon (James Marsden), a dashing, seriously injured soldier from a wealthy Southern family. Once recovered, he courts Allie aggressively and, just when the beautiful couple are on the verge of marrying and becoming the toast of Charleston society, she reads a newspaper article about Noah's architectural restoration and promptly faints. A reunion is in order.
For a movie that might have plunged full-scale into bathos, ''The Notebook'' tries to remain restrained. The camera caresses the lush Southern landscape of blood-red sunsets and flocks of ducks, and Aaron Zigman's romantic score drizzles only a light coating of syrup over the ice cream.
''The Notebook'' is a high-toned cinematic greeting card. It insists on true, mystical, eternal love, till death do us part, and won't have it any other way.
''The Notebook'' 
~
Most movies require some suspension of disbelief. But ''White Chicks,'' a comedy starring the brothers Marlon and Shawn Wayans as African-American F.B.I. agents who disguise themselves as dippy white socialites for a weekend in the Hamptons, requires something more radical than that. A full frontal lobotomy might be a good place to start.
Dressed up in their white-girl drag -- the celebutantes they are impersonating, the Wilson sisters, are obviously based on Nikki and Paris Hilton -- the Wayans brothers look as if they've just lumbered in from ''Dawn of the Dead.'' With rubber prosthetics making their faces all but immobile and blue contact lenses giving them that much sought-after vacant-eyed zombie look, they're scarier than anything in ''Scary Movie'' and ''Scary Movie 2,'' the last two films in which, like this one, they starred under the direction of their older brother, Keenen Ivory Wayans.
And yet when Marcus (Marlon Wayans) and Kevin (Shawn Wayans) show up at the Royal Hamptons Hotel in full drag -- impersonating the Wilson sisters to protect them from kidnappers -- they're immediately accepted by the sisters' three best friends (Busy Philipps, Jennifer Carpenter and Jessica Cauffiel). If it's possible to libel spoiled, empty-headed socialites, the Wayans have done it: nobody could be this stupid.
Nobody, that is, except for another character in this movie. The former National Football League player Terry Crews plays the equivalent of the Joe E. Brown character in this thoroughly dumbed-down, perhaps even unintentional remake of ''Some Like It Hot.'' He's Latrell Spencer, a wealthy, Sean Combs-ish character who develops a crush on Marcus, the smaller of the two agents and slightly more credible in his miniskirts. The huge, heavily muscled Mr. Crews, who must be a wonderful sport, takes the brunt of the humiliating physical gags that make up the only real comic strategy of ''White Chicks,'' suffering countless insults to his masculinity and bearing.
All of this seems to be a way for the Wayans brothers to deflect the sexually subversive aspect of female impersonation. Not only are they carefully, emphatically marked as not gay -- one has been provided with a jealous wife (Faune Chambers), the other with a potential love interest in the form of an attractive television reporter (Rochelle Aytes) -- but they are also prohibited from taking any surreptitious pleasure in their masquerade, as the Tony Curtis and Jack Lemmon characters did so memorably in ''Some Like It Hot.'' Instead of making any surprising discoveries about themselves in their new identities, either as women or as whites of a privileged class, Marcus and Kevin seem just as blandly insensitive at the end of the film as at the beginning, though Marcus does learn to listen when his wife tries to talk to him.
Credibility, of course, wouldn't matter if the gags were good enough, which they are not. The film quickly falls back on the gross-out jokes that have made recent American comedies such a challenge to the digestive tract. As the Wayans brothers make sport with most of the known bodily fluids -- and seem even to discover some new ones in the process -- you may find your dinner plans fading away.
''White Chicks'' has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned), for crude humor and a fleeting drug joke.
WHITE CHICKS
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans; written by Keenen Ivory Wayans, Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Andy McElfresh, Michael Anthony Snowden and Xavier Cook, based on a story by Keenen Ivory Wayans and Shawn and Marlon Wayans; director of photography, Steven Bernstein; edited by Jeffrey Stephen Gourson and Stuart Pappé; music by Teddy Castellucci; production designer, Paul J. Peters; produced by Keenen Ivory Wayans, Shawn Wayans, Marlon Wayans, Rick Alvarez and Lee R. Mayes; released by Revolution Studios and Columbia Pictures. Running time: 97 minutes. This film 
~
In ''DodgeBall: A True Underdog Story,'' Ben Stiller returns to the comedy crime scene to portray a monstrous, pumped-up fitness guru and hilarious variation of Derek Zoolander, the airheaded male model he played with pursed-lipped, vacant-eyed perfection three years (and many, many dull movies) ago. Nobody eviscerates the scary depths of male narcissism with such ferocity, and it is a huge relief to find Mr. Stiller flexing his oiled, low-comedy triceps with such vengeful glee.
His character, White Goodman, a glaring, preening product of fanatical self-improvement, wears a blow-dry mullet and a Fu Manchu mustache and favors hideous white leisure suits. Affecting the pseudomacho bark of a drill instructor, he suggests Anthony Robbins as a shrimpy, steroid-enhanced gym rat. Making a crude pass at a woman, he remains blissfully unfazed when she throws up in her mouth. ''In some cultures, they only eat vomit,'' he chirps. ''I read about it in a book.''
Once a 600-pound sack of blubber, White, when alone in his office, practices self-administered aversion therapy in which he attaches electrodes to his nipples and trains himself to resist the temptations of junk food. Before an appointment with a pretty woman, he uses an air pump to inflate his crotch into an outrageous bulge. Mr. Stiller, with a face that veers between the geeky and the handsome, and a bunched-up body that even when buffed looks strangely misshapen, skewers male vanity with the X-ray vision of someone who has writhed in its clutches.
White and the world of sneering babes and hunks that crowds his gleaming emporium, the Globo Gym, represent the Goliath that Peter La Fleur (Vince Vaughn), the slobby, nice guy who owns Average Joe's, a nearby low-rent gym, sets out to slay. When a pretty blond bank lawyer threatens to foreclose on Peter's gym unless he comes comes up with $50,000 in a hurry, White itches to buy the crumbling enterprise and add it to his chain.
The absurd moneymaking scheme that Peter and his nerdy pals come up with is to compete for the $50,000 first prize in a Las Vegas dodge ball tournament. Never mind that the Average Joes have no experience in the sport. To study it they absorb a grim 1950's instructional film in which a youthful Patches O'Houlihan (Hank Azaria), a legendary dodge ball champion, gives lessons in what he touts as ''the sport of violence, exclusion and degradation.'' Meanwhile, White assembles his own team, the Purple Cobras, to compete in what one gushing sports announcer describes as an event ''bigger than the World Cup, the World Series and World War II combined.''
Lo and behold, the aged Patches (Rip Torn) turns up in a motorized wheelchair, his aggression undiminished, to train the Average Joes. His favorite teaching tools, carried in a sack, are wrenches that he hurls full-force at the heads of his pupils to help them master the essential D's of the sport: ''dip, duck, dive and dodge.'' Many head injuries later, the Average Joes have learned their lessons well.
''DodgeBall,'' a promising first feature written and directed by Rawson Marshall Thurber (whose previous credits include Reebok commercials) may be a silly throwaway sports spoof, but it is consistently funny. Some of its jokes are tasteless, others envelope-pushing, and some both. The movie loses only a little of its maniacal glee by the time of the playoffs. In the first round, when the Average Joes find themselves facing a team of savagely competitive Girl Scouts, the movie glides up to another peak of daffiness. In a later round, a mix-up in uniforms forces them to prance around the court in skimpy leather and bondage gear.
The movie, which opens nationwide today, unapologetically roots for the über-nerds. And what a curious crew they are. They include a pudgy Panglossian milquetoast (Stephen Root) whose blocked anger explodes in the nick of time; a chicken-chested, absent-minded ninny (Joel David Moore); and a lunatic who imagines he's a pirate. Any movie that is fonder of these losers than of their robotic would-be nemeses is O.K. by me.
''DodgeBall'' 
~
One of the overarching jokes in ''Napoleon Dynamite,'' the odd, amusing debut of the 24-year-old filmmaker Jared Hess, is that such a grandiose, explosive title should be attached to such a small-scale, deadpan film. Napoleon Dynamite is also the name of the movie's awkward, frizzy-haired hero, a high school student in Preston, Idaho, whose world-conquering potential is invisible to everyone but him.
Napoleon, played by Jon Heder with unnerving conviction, is a gangly mouth-breather whose affectless eccentricity could easily be mistaken for simple-mindedness. ''He's a tender little guy,'' says his Uncle Rico (Jon Gries), a sad, sleazy fellow who drives around in an orange-and-brown Dodge van selling plastic food-storage containers. This is about the kindest thing anyone says about Napoleon, who is taunted, harassed and laughed at in school. It is also the truest, though it may take you a while to appreciate Napoleon, and to grasp that the movie's attitude toward him is ultimately more tender than cruel.
Mr. Hess grew up in Preston, which he films as a collection of lonely houses dropped in the middle of an empty landscape of mountains and rangeland, and his filmmaking style is well suited to the rhythms of small-town Western life. His mockery of the local quirks and delusions is grounded in both affection and impatience, and his dry, barbed visual and verbal jokes reflect the humor of a place where time doesn't move too quickly and people don't talk much.
The story takes shape slowly. Napoleon lives with his brother, Kip (Aaron Ruell), their boisterous grandmother and a bored llama. When Grandma cracks her coccyx in a motorbike accident, Uncle Rico comes to baby-sit, even though Kip, the elder brother, is 32. Meanwhile, Napoleon befriends a shy Mexican boy named Pedro (Efren Ramirez) and an amateur photographer named Deb (Tina Majorino) who sells garish handmade key chains door to door.
Rico, who at one point purchases a time-travel machine over the Internet, is obsessed with the year 1982, when he lost his chance at high school football glory. (''We could have won State.'') Judging from their clothes and hair, Rico and the other residents of Preston are still living in his favorite year. If not for the occasional reference to the Internet (where the frail and flighty Kip searches for love and, remarkably, finds it), you might mistake ''Napoleon Dynamite'' for an exercise in fond, cringing nostalgia, doing for '82 what Richard Linklater's ''Dazed and Confused'' did for '76.
Of course, Mr. Hess and his 23-year-old wife, Jerusha, with whom he wrote the screenplay, are much too young to remember 1982, and the nostalgia in ''Napoleon Dynamite,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is the kind that people in their 20's, in whatever decade, inevitably begin to feel for high school.
Mr. Hess, who studied film -- and met most of his cast and crew -- at Brigham Young University, has a lot of talent and also a lot to learn. The performances, even those by trained actors like Mr. Ramirez and Ms. Majorino, have the hesitant, blinking opacity that some directors look for in nonprofessional casts. Their awkwardness is charming, and part of the point of the movie, but it also makes for some dull stretches and thwarts your ability to regard the characters with sympathy rather than mere curiosity.
At the end, Mr. Hess turns his meandering assembly of quiet observations and slapstick inventions -- which, at their best, suggest a combination of Tod Solondz and Bill Forsyth -- into an unconvincingly uplifting fairy tale. Napoleon's triumph is sure to please audiences who need to forgive themselves for laughing at his earlier misfortune, but it comes a little too easily, and it compromises the film's most interesting quality, which is its stubborn, confident, altogether weird individuality.
''Napoleon Dynamite'' 
~
If this is the only newspaper you read, then a bit of explanation might be in order. Garfield is a cat who says funny things at his owner's expense, makes fun of a dog named Odie and eats a lot of lasagna. That's right, lasagna. A cat who eats lasagna! Isn't that the craziest thing you've ever heard?
Here's something even crazier: someone at 20th Century Fox has decided that ''Garfield,'' Jim Davis's long-running syndicated comic strip, tolerated by millions of newspaper readers around the world, should be adapted into a movie. Apparently, Hollywood has run through all the old, beloved television shows, all the television shows nobody really cared about and most of the theme park rides in Orlando, Fla., and has now decided to turn its synergistic attention to the funny pages. I have a feeling ''Garfield: The Movie,'' which opens nationwide today, is only the beginning. I'm bracing myself for ''Cathy,'' for ''Ziggy'' and, of course, for ''Marmaduke.''
The guiding principle behind ''Garfield,'' directed by Pete Hewitt from a script by Joel Cohen and Alec Sokolow, seems be that jokes that barely raise a chuckle when stretched across three pen-and-ink panels become gems of hilarity once they are outfitted with celebrity voices, soundtrack music (James Brown's ''I Feel Good'' -- how original!) and computer-generated special effects.
There are many problems with this theory, one of which is economic. In the paper the weary smile provoked by Garfield's sarcasm or Odie's idiocy will seem like a positive bargain. You've spent 50 cents, and you still have the Jumble and the box scores to see you through your morning coffee. Movies are another matter entirely, and you are likely to leave this one feeling as grouchy and put-upon as the title character.
Then there is the matter of plot. Most humorous comic strips don't have them. The problem with ''Garfield: The Movie'' is that it does. Jon (Breckin Meyer), the hapless, dateless owner, now has a love interest, a kindly veterinarian named Liz, played by Jennifer Love Hewitt in a succession of uncomfortable suits. It is she who unleashes Odie on Garfield, who must overcome his laziness and egoism when Odie is kidnapped by an unscrupulous television personality named Happy Chapman (Stephen Tobolowsky). Garfield must grow, in other words. He must, like every prickly, selfish Hollywood hero, learn a valuable lesson.
Excuse me, but what cat has ever learned anything, valuable or not? The whole point of cats is that they are immune to training, moral instruction or any other kind of education. A little realism, please. That Garfield speaks in the supercilious, world-weary drawl of Bill Murray is some small consolation, as are a few of the animal tricks. Odie, for example, is played by a talented (and, mercifully, voiceless) mutt who is remarkably good at walking on his hind legs. Garfield himself has the rubbery, two-and-a-half-dimensional look common to computer-animated creatures, but he moves in a convincingly obese-feline manner. The movie may lack the insight and nuance of the comic strip, but at least it is short, and at least the studio didn't skimp on the lasagna.
''Garfield: The Movie'' 
~
''The Stepford Wives,'' Frank Oz's madcap re-engineering of a dusty, second-rate thriller from 1975, opens with a montage of happy housewives and their household gadgets. Making fun of images like these -- smiling women in Eisenhower-era perms and evening gowns swooning over their automated kitchen cabinets -- has become such a tiresome pop-culture staple that you may wonder if the movie, which opens today nationwide, has anything new to say about feminism, suburbia or consumer society. The answer is not really, but it does manage to fire off a handful of decent jokes and a few sneaky insights before losing its nerve and collapsing into incoherence.
The source for both this film and the earlier one, which starred Katharine Ross and Paula Prentiss, is a slim, efficient novel by Ira Levin that uses the conventions of suspense fiction as a vehicle for allegory and social satire. Mr. Levin's Stepford, Conn., was a pleasant middle-class suburb whose menfolk, threatened by the rather mild feminism of their wives, killed them off and replaced them with subservient, sexually compliant robots.
The first ''Stepford Wives'' exploited the horror-movie implications of this premise, rather than its comic possibilities. Mr. Oz and Paul Rudnick, the screenwriter, swerve maniacally in the opposite direction, whipping up a gaudy, noisy farce that perpetually threatens to spin out of control and eventually does. The music, by David Arnold, is full of overdone, campy melodrama, like an Elmer Bernstein score for a Three Stooges picture. The performances -- in particular Glenn Close, as Stepford's robot matriarch -- are both sly and overstated, giving Mr. Rudnick's sneaky one-liners a chance to be heard amidst the cacophonous silliness.
Needless to say, a lot has changed in 30 years: now, Stepford is a gated subdivision full of late-model S.U.V.'s and sprawling stone McMansions, where a gay couple is welcomed and where everyone is white. (In Mr. Levin's novel a black family had just come to town, but I guess they've moved away.) Sexual politics have also come a long way. Joanna Eberhart, who dabbled in photography when she was played by Ms. Ross, is now, in the person of Nicole Kidman, the ruthless, ambitious head of a television network. Fired in the wake of a reality-show disaster, Joanna has a quick nervous breakdown and is then spirited off to Stepford by her nebbishy, beta-male husband, Walter (Matthew Broderick).
In the earlier ''Stepford,'' the flight from New York was implicitly motivated by fear of urban chaos and social collapse. This time, though, the Eberharts are fleeing from the soul-emptying consequences of their own ambition, seeking out the cozy simplicity of an affluent world in which no one seems to have, or to need, a job. The husbands, a collection of lumpy, khaki-wearing dweebs (with the exception of Christopher Walken, their guru of old-school masculinity), congregate in the clubby headquarters of the Men's Association, which is also where their robot workshop is housed. The wives, meanwhile, cheerfully perform their household and bedroom duties, steered by personalized brass remote-control devices wielded by their owners -- er, mates.
Though Joanna is repelled by the empty-headed obedience of the Stepford wives, she also wants to repair the damage that her career has inflicted on her husband and children. This damage is mentioned rather than shown, and the repair work is highly theoretical, since children in Stepford are only slightly more visible than black people. There is, however, a schticky pair of token Jews, played by Jon Lovitz and Bette Midler, whose character, until she is robotized, is a slovenly, loud-mouthed novelist and one of Joanna's few friends.
Mr. Rudnick is best at forging tiny verbal darts that tickle more than they sting. (Late in the game, Joanna discovers that one of the robot-designers once worked for AOL. ''Is that why the women are so slow?'' she asks.) Occasionally, as in the film's clever, cautionary view of gay marriage, you might intuit a crackle of genuine satire, but for the most part ''The Stepford Wives'' is as cheerful and inoffensive as its title characters. Every time you think it might be venturing toward social criticism, it pulls back into homily and reassurance, refusing to tell anyone in the audience anything she -- or he -- might not want to hear.
There are, of course, some real tensions and resentments embedded in this story -- the hard choices facing ambitious women, the immaturity and misogyny that surge through so much popular culture, a rampaging materialism that makes the Stepford of 1975 look like a kibbutz -- but the movie, especially in its disastrous and nonsensical final act, works as hard as it can to suppress them.
''The Stepford Wives'' is, in other words, the opposite of satire. It is intended not to provoke but to soothe, to tell us, once again, that we can have it all, that nobody's perfect, and that if there is trouble in the world, or in our own homes, it's nothing we need to worry our pretty little heads about.
''The Stepford Wives'' 
~
The concentration of synthetic hormones pumping through the vascular system of ''The Chronicles of Riddick'' matches any recent action-adventure movie in the sheer density of steroids per liter of body fluid. In its primitive universe of clanging armor and giant stone structures -- at once prehistoric and futuristic -- the faces are so grim you might conclude that except for a malevolent smirk or two, smiling must be against the law.
In bodybuilding terms, this overmuscled sequel to ''Pitch Black'' is all bulk and no definition. In touch with the grunting, preening culture of professional wrestling, the negligible screenplay by David Twohy, who directed both movies, is crammed with trailer-ready tag lines. Intoned by its star, Vin Diesel, with a sly comic gravity, these enigmatic blurbs mean next to nothing. But who needs narrative coherence, or even literacy, anyway? If you can dead-lift 300 pounds, you're the man!
''The Chronicles of Riddick'' is Mr. Diesel's ultimate shot at becoming something like the New Terminator, and his future as a superstar may hang in the balance. More than Arnold Schwarzenegger, whose Austrian accent always made him seem more robotic than human, Mr. Diesel, in a black tank top and sunglasses, is a walking domination fantasy.
His harsh, Marine Corps sergeant's voice, echoing Lee Marvin's, was made to bark commands. Add Telly Savalas's shaved head, slack mouth and eyes as mean as a charging bull's, and finish off with a dungeon master's studied arrogance, and you have the recipe for the most exaggerated caricature of macho menace Hollywood has yet produced.
Returning from ''Pitch Black,'' Mr. Diesel's character, Riddick, might be described as the heavy metal version of Brad Pitt's Achilles in ''Troy.'' A fugitive from a distant planet, pursued across the universe by bounty hunters, he is an independent operator out only for himself. Since the original movie in 2000, Riddick's surgically enhanced radarlike night vision has acquired extra powers. As he locks eyes with a ravenous, multifanged monster, his ferocious glare tames the beast into a docile pet.
Planet by planet, the universe is falling into the hands of the Necromongers, a warrior race whose leader, Lord Marshal (Colm Feore), a paranoid, slightly effeminate villain (as power-mad megabaddies are apt to be in high-testosterone movies) oversees mass conversions of conquered peoples into warrior slaves in service to ''the Underverse.'' In a movie in which knives and axes are the weapons of choice, Lord Marshal totes around a grotesquely unwieldy three-headed battle ax.
The pseudotortures in the movie include a mind-reading device that causes excruciating pain as it closes in on both sides of the head and whispers its findings. Riddick spends half the movie in bondage, his sweaty arms stretched out in a Crucifixion-like pose. Taken to a prison planet, he is lowered into a chamber on ropes and chains. It is little consolation when the conquerors assure their victims that after the agonizing conversion process, their pain will eventually ease. To maintain its PG-13 rating, however, ''The Chronicles of Riddick'' can go only so far. There are no gory floggings, and the language steers clear of obscenity.
Nasty political conspiracies swirl on the Necromongers' home base, where Lord Marshal demands absolute loyalty. Throw in a glowering, power-hungry second-in-command, Vaako (Karl Urban), and his Lady Macbeth-like wife (Thandie Newton); a secretly duplicitous lieutenant, Purifier (Linus Roache); and a psychic captive, Aereon (Judi Dench), from a conquered race, who floats around in ghostly double-exposure, and you have a recipe for treachery.
This movie's damsel-in-distress factor is handled by Alexa Davalos as Kyra, a woman from Riddick's distant past. True to today's action-adventure iconography, she is no shrinking violet. As tough and ruthless as Riddick, she causes far more distress than she endures.
But ''The Chronicles of Riddick,'' which opens today nationwide, is not really concerned with politics or romance. It is all about nonstop action, computer-generated spectacle and sanitized sadomasochism, edited into one big, roaring whir. There is continual hand-to-hand combat, but little blood. Although the body count is high, there are no death throes. Mr. Diesel sails through much of the movie with only a scratch on his left cheek. It isn't until the very end that he appears seriously messed up.
Stylistically, ''The Chronicles of Riddick'' is nothing like ''Pitch Black,'' whose setting in a desolate, forgotten corner of the universe sustained a mood of creeping chill. The locations in this sequel are just as forbidding. Scorching sunrises in the bleak, craggy landscape trigger rolling volcanic tides of smoke and debris.
But the action is so frenetic that the ominous mood isn't allowed to penetrate, and this time the human factor is all but erased. The fight sequences integrate the leap-and-twirl acrobatics of Hong Kong martial-arts films into the mix so thoroughly that the camera doesn't bother to stand back and admire. Speed, not grace, is what counts, and there is not a moment when the movie is allowed to dawdle.
But does it up to anything? If all war all the time in a Cro-Magnon future is your rose-colored vision of what lies ahead, maybe so.
''The Chronicles of Riddick'' 
~
For certain grown-ups in the audience, the most thrilling moment in ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban'' may well be the director's credit at the beginning. Alfonso Cuarón, who made the feverish and romantic ''Y Tu Mamá También,'' is a name sure to set many critics' hearts aflutter, even as the majority of hard-core Harry Potter fans, who tend not to see many unrated, subtitled pictures or to know the names of many foreign filmmakers, are likely to respond with a shrug.
The kids may also, at this point, be feeling a bit blasé about Harry himself. He will no doubt remain a beloved and profitable fixture of juvenile popular culture for years to come, but the mania that greeted the publication of the two latest Potter books (and the release of the first two movies) seems, at least for the moment, to have subsided. The first generation of Potterphiles has moved on to other forms of fantasy -- Philip Pullman's ''Dark Materials'' cycle, J. R. R. Tolkien's perennial ''Rings,'' the study manuals of Stanley Kaplan -- while their younger siblings now encounter the Potter series as a hand-me-down, rather than as their own special discovery.
All of which places Mr. Cuarón in an awkward position. As a filmmaker he is very much on the rise, while his hero may have reached a plateau. His accomplishment is thus in danger of being underappreciated. ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban'' -- which opens nationwide tomorrow, with some midnight showings tonight -- is the best of J. K. Rowling's books so far. It balances the narrative economy of the first two with the thematic depth and imaginative ambition of its ungainly sequels. And Mr. Cuarón's adaptation, from a screenplay by Steve Kloves, more than does it justice.
This is surely the most interesting of the three Potter movies, in part because it is the first one that actually looks and feels like a movie, rather than a staged reading with special effects. ''Sorcerer's Stone'' and ''Chamber of Secrets,'' both directed with literal-minded competence by Chris Columbus (who has stayed on as a producer) may have been more faithful to Ms. Rowling's text, but ''Azkaban'' attempts, and for the most part achieves, a trickier sort of translation. This film may disappoint some dogmatic Old Hogwartsians: a few plot points have been sacrificed, and Mr. Cuarón does not seem to care much for Quidditch. But it more than compensates for these lapses with its emotional force and visual panache.
Mr. Cuaron's wizard world, shot by the gifted New Zealand-born cinematographer Michael Seresin, is grainier and grimier than Mr. Columbus's. It feels at once more dangerous, more thoroughly enchanted and more real. While the two first episodes took place mostly in the corridors and classrooms of Hogwarts, this one lingers in the shadowy forests and damp meadows outside the school walls, a setting that emphasizes Mr. Cuarón's knack for evoking the haunting, sensual power of the natural world.
Harry, Ron and Hermione (played once again by Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint and Emma Watson), hover on the brink of adolescence, and while they look braver and more capable than before, the dangers they face seem far more grave and their own vulnerability more intense.
At the beginning, in the obligatory Muggle-baiting scene, Harry's latent anger at his orphaned state (and at his cruel adoptive guardians) nearly overwhelms him. As the story leads him toward a confrontation with the man who may have killed his parents (an escaped prisoner played by the all-purpose movie villain Gary Oldman), Harry's happy-go-lucky decency is darkened by grief, rage and moral confusion.
Or at least they should be. Mr. Radcliffe, arriving at puberty, may also have reached the limit of his range as an actor. When called upon to convey deep or complex feelings, he has a tendency to blink and look nervous. To be fair, Harry is an especially treacherous role, since he is both the charismatic center of the drama and the character everyone watching imagines him- or herself to be. This means he has to be heroically distinguished from his peers without having too distinct a personality of his own, a paradoxical demand very few young actors could ever satisfy.
Luckily Mr. Radcliffe's blandness is offset by Ms. Watson's spiky impatience. Harry may show off his expanding wizardly skills in facing down dementors, werewolves and mad dogs, but Hermione, her fuse shortened by an impossible course load, earns the loudest applause with a decidedly unmagical punch to Draco Malfoy's deserving nose.
While the monstrous special effects are seamlessly inserted into the musty halls and twilight fields, ''Prisoner of Azkaban,'' like its predecessors, is anchored by top-of-the-line flesh-and-blood British acting. Michael Gambon, as the wise headmaster Albus Dumbledore, has gracefully stepped into Richard Harris's conical hat and flowing robes, and Maggie Smith shows up now and again to shake her head and purse her lips.
I am happy to report that this story has more Snape than the last, which means more chances to savor Alan Rickman's dry, sibilant sneering. New additions to the Hogwarts faculty include Emma Thompson as a daft, half-blind soothsayer and David Thewlis as an apparently kindly professor of spells with an uncomfortable secret.
There is also a late, marvelously repellent appearance by Timothy Spall, but to say too much about it would risk spoiling a nice surprise and compromising some of Ms. Rowling's -- and Mr. Cuarón's -- devilish magic.
''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban'' 
~
Directed by Jessy Terrero
R, 86 minutes
You've never seen (and hopefully never boarded) an aircraft operated like the wobbly purple plane that bounces like a rubber toy on the way to takeoff in ''Soul Plane,'' which opens nationwide today. This hectic farce, which pushes every envelope, is so broad and relentlessly raunchy that it makes a spoof like ''Airplane'' seem as demure as a vintage drawing-room comedy.
The movie, directed by Jessy Terrero from a screenplay by Bo Zenga and Chuck Wilson, depicts the raucous cross-country journey of flight No. 069 on NWA Airlines. The company was founded by Nashawn (Kevin Hart), an unemployed, self-described entrepreneur and his cousin Muggsy (Method Man) with $100 million that Nashawn won in a lawsuit against a carrier that lost his beloved pooch. NWA bills itself as the first full-service airline catering to the ''urban traveler.''
Its maiden flight, from Los Angeles to New York, may be the wildest coast-to-coast party ever given in the air. Above the main cabin is a disco whose roof looks out on the stars. The dining ranges from fancy (Roederer Cristal Champagne, filet mignon and lobster, for first-class passengers) to atrocious (Colt 45 and greasy fried chicken, one piece to a customer) for everybody else stuck in ''low class.''
One of those unfortunates is Elvis Hunkee (Tom Arnold), the divorced father of two rebellious children, who is traveling with his trashy girlfriend, Barbara (Missi Pyle). Smiling gamely with each humiliation, Elvis is the designated clueless white man in a movie that stretches every cliché of African-American sexuality way beyond caricature.
Not everyone will be thrilled by the movie, which is one long dirty (and occasionally very funny) joke. ''Soul Plane'' gleefully flaunts every black pop culture stereotype that Spike Lee savaged in ''Bamboozled.'' For long stretches, it really is a flying minstrel show of studs, sluts and lustful stoned-out layabouts, ogling one another and making lewd remarks. In a typical joke, a blind man lasciviously fingers a baked potato and goes into paroxysms of ecstasy.
Snoop Dogg, at his drollest, plays the pilot, Captain Mack, fresh out of prison, with his sneaky sideways smile and slit-eyed glances mocking everything in sight. But once the plane takes off, this coolest of clowns confesses that he's terrified of heights. When he passes out from an overdose of magic mushrooms belonging to his co-pilot, Gaeman (note the pun), the flight seems doomed. But never fear. In airplane disaster films and the movies that spoof them, the jet always lands safely.
''Soul Plane'' 
~
Smiles that sell movie tickets can run in the family. Take the sweetly complicitous grin of Kate Hudson, which spreads across her face like a blush of sunrise. A softer variation of her mother Goldie Hawn's ferociously perky baring of choppers, it lends her character in ''Raising Helen'' a likability belied by her profession. Effusing manic efficiency every waking moment, Helen Harris is the scuffling gal Friday and Little Ms. Fixit to Dominique (Helen Mirren), the queenly chief of a New York fashion agency.
On the fast track to A-list Manhattan insufferability, Helen lives out a dreamy, sanitized version of the ''Sex and the City'' lifestyle, partying all night, then skipping into the office all a-bubble with nifty little notions that anticipate her boss's every whim. The youngest of three sisters, she is the undisputed star of the family when she zips over to New Jersey to celebrate the birthday of her older sister Lindsay Davis (Felicity Huffman), who is happily married with three children, and the family members put on silly Devo hats and bounce around singing ''Whip It.''
But Helen's life of fun, fun, fun comes to a screeching halt the moment Lindsay and her husband are killed in a car crash. Lindsay's will delivers a shock: Helen, and not the obvious choice, her married-with-children older sister and suburban supermom, Jenny Portman (Joan Cusack), is asked to assume custody of the orphans. The rest of the movie tells the warm and fuzzy story of Helen's bumbling surrogate parenthood and her discovery of family values and true romance in an outer borough.
Dismissed from her job after her frisky nephew, Henry (Spencer Breslin), runs wild on a fashion runway, Helen finds work at a used-car dealership run by a cheery television-obsessed salesman. In no time Helen proves herself a crack saleswoman by ridding the lot of its most sales-resistant lemon.
''Raising Helen,'' a soft-hearted, squishy-minded prototype for a network sitcom, is mildly ingratiating but never laugh-out-loud funny. Even Ms. Hudson's intrepid radiance can't camouflage the premise's leaky foundation. Although posthumously read letters to each sister are produced to explain Lindsay's choice of the wrong one to bring up her children, her explanations don't wash.
The movie, directed by Garry Marshall (''Runaway Bride,'' ''The Princess Diaries''), pretends to address the practical issues of single parenthood in New York but is far too skittish to do more than bring up a problem or two, then solve it with a magical sitcom-ready wave of its wand. Once Helen has found an apartment in Queens, the question of the children's schooling is settled with the miraculous discovery of an affordable Lutheran school right in the neighborhood. Cheery-cheeked Pastor Dan (John Corbett), who runs it, is a handsome single Prince Charming-in-waiting who adores children and sets about proving to Helen that he's sexy as well as devout.
Helen's most ticklish problem is how to rein in her rebellious niece, Audrey (Hayden Panettiere), a sulky, budding babe in her early teens pursued by a surly older boy who sneeringly addresses Helen as ''Mommy.'' When Audrey gives an unauthorized party, the Harris home is overrun with raging hormones and hip-hop lingo. It takes a next-door neighbor wielding a bat to show Helen how to disperse an unruly teenage gathering. The movie's dubious solution to disciplining a rebellious teenager tempted by defloration and drugs is to deliver a firm but loving ''no.'' Presto: problem solved.
The issue to which the movie devotes the most time is the simmering sibling rivalry between glamorous Helen and mousy Jenny. That conflict is resolved in a sugary shorthand gesture. Poor Ms. Cusack seems trapped in the role of Jenny, a character so drab that her screwball charm is suffocated. Despite the uprooting in the younger children's lives, their distress is boiled down to a single worrisome quirk for each. Henry, who used to love sports, won't play basketball, and Sarah (Abigail Breslin) refuses to tie her shoes.
Much as it purports to be an oasis of wisdom and reassurance for harried parents and lonely single mothers, ''Raising Helen,'' which opens nationwide today, is about as nourishing as a watery chicken soup leached of nutrients. Why is Ms. Hudson smiling?
''Raising Helen'' 
~
''Saved!,'' a teen comedy set in a Christian high school, is an admirable attempt to acknowledge some aspects of contemporary American social reality that many movies shy away from. It pokes satirical fun at the religious sentiment currently sweeping though the popular culture while at the same time partaking of some of the energy and idealism that the Christian youth movement has brought to the entertainment industry, especially pop music.
Throwing foam-rubber darts at easy targets, the film, directed by Brian Dannelly, also wants to be a peace offering in the culture wars, suggesting that the polarization of our society is a smoke screen for our own internal confusion about values, morals and desire.
All of which makes me wish I could say that ''Saved!,'' which opens today in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago and Washington, is actually a good movie. It has a bright young cast and a clever, eclectic soundtrack, but the tone veers unsteadily from mockery to preachiness, and the story loses its breath, hopping from one clumsily paced scene to the next.
The heroine, Mary (Jena Malone), lives with her widowed mother (Mary-Louise Parker), who may be carrying on an affair with Pastor Skip (Martin Donovan), the youthful and dynamic principal of the Eagle Christian Academy, where Mary is about to start her senior year. Skip, a descendant of the guitar-strumming ministers of an earlier era, peppers his speech with obsolete hip-hop jargon (''Let's kick it for Christ''), and Mr. Donovan has the wit to play him not as a buffoon, but as, all things considered, a pretty cool guy.
Mr. Dannelly (who wrote the script with Michael Urban) is careful not to turn his characters into caricatures. In nearly every respect, from their social interactions to their clothes and cars, the students at Eagle Christian Academy are indistinguishable from those at any other big-screen or small-screen suburban high school.
Hilary Faye (Mandy Moore) is a kind of mean girl for Jesus, sitting atop the school pecking order as the leader of a clique called the Christian Jewels. Ms. Moore, who played a saintly preacher's daughter in ''A Walk to Remember'' and a sassy rebel in ''How to Deal,'' turns to adolescent villainy with obvious relish, savoring every nuance of Hilary Faye's self-righteousness and vanity. (She also sings a couple of full-throated devotional anthems.)
A few notable heresies aside, the plot of ''Saved!'' is fairly orthodox in teen movie terms. Mary, who had been Hilary Faye's best friend, must be cast out into the company of the school pariahs -- Cassandra (Eva Amurri), the token Jew and all-around bad girl, and Roland (Macauley Culkin), Hilary Faye's disabled brother. Pastor Skip's son (Patrick Fugit) is a dreamy skateboarder whose allegiances are allowed to remain ambiguous for a while, though there's no real doubt about where he'll end up.
The complicating factor is that, for most of the movie, Mary is pregnant, as a result of a decision that represents the film's unrealized comic potential. Just before senior year starts, her boyfriend, Dean (Chad Faust), tells Mary that he thinks he's gay, and she decides (with the encouragement of a swimming pool maintenance man whom she mistakes for Jesus) to cure him. Her condition sets up the movie's big message, which is that religious morality should be tolerant of human fallibility and difference, and which is delivered in a series of speeches during the big prom-night climax.
Some Christians may object that ''Saved!,'' in the end, promotes liberal humanist piety at the expense of religious belief, and there is some truth to this complaint. At the same time, satire can never be evenhanded, and it's possible that this movie would have been better if it had indulged in a little more cruelty. As it is, the picture is unlikely to offend or provoke very many people. Unfortunately, it is also unlikely to satisfy too many, either.
''Saved!'' 
~
''The Day After Tomorrow,'' a two-hour $125 million disaster -- excuse me, I mean disaster movie -- that opens nationwide tomorrow, proposes an apocalypse that covers the Northern Hemisphere in a sheet of ice and snow. Hailstones resembling crystal paperweights pummel Tokyo, and furious tornadoes tear through Los Angeles, ''erasing,'' as one quick-witted weatherman notes, ''the Hollywood sign'' (and also smashing the Capitol Records building). A wall of water courses up Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, followed by a Russian containership, and then the whole thing freezes as a new ice age arrives.
The cause of this disaster, which unfolds over a few unlucky and very stressful days, is global warming. The hero is a scientist named Jack Hall, played by Dennis Quaid with a haunted look, a perpetually clenched jaw and visible discomfort at having to say movie-scientist things like ''I think we've hit a critical desalinization point.'' A colleague murmurs thoughtfully, ''That would explain the extreme weather.'' Well yes, come to think of it, I suppose it would.
Some environmental groups using the release of ''The Day After Tomorrow'' to raise awareness of global warming say in their publicity materials that the accuracy of the movie's science is beside the point. The conditions could take hundreds of years to develop, and it is the prerogative of movies to heighten, condense and extrapolate. But if the film is meant to prod anxieties about ecological catastrophe and to encourage political action in response, it seems unlikely to succeed. Not because the events it depicts seem implausible, but because they seem like no big deal.
''The Day After Tomorrow,'' directed by Roland Emmerich (''The Patriot,'' ''Independence Day'') traces its roots to the melodramatic calamity freak-outs of the early 1970's: films like ''The Towering Inferno,'' ''The Poseidon Adventure'' and ''Earthquake.'' The picture is most entertaining when it acknowledges the swaggering cheesiness of this tradition. Mr. Quaid, as the level-headed man of reason to whom nobody will listen until it's too late, walks credibly in the footsteps of Steve McQueen, Gene Hackman and Charlton Heston. It's not his best work, but if someone has to do the job, it might as well be him.
Jack, whose research provides the best available model for the sudden, gigantic storms that cover Europe, North America and Siberia, must contend not only with the intransigence of Washington bigwigs, but also with the disappearance of his son, Sam (Jake Gyllenhaal), who is in Manhattan on a school trip. Sam and some of his buddies (including Emily Rossum, who played Sean Penn's murdered daughter in ''Mystic River'') are holed up in the New York Public Library, burning its priceless holdings to keep warm as the ice age sets in.
Jack, after barking out dire warnings and I-told-you-so's to the vice president, sets off to rescue his son. Meanwhile some scientists in Scotland (including Adrian Lester and Ian Holm) philosophize about human destiny as they slowly freeze to death. Back in Washington Jack's former wife (Sela Ward) tends to a young cancer patient.
While the human drama plays out in quiet, predictable set pieces, the large-scale disaster is rendered through elephantine, and occasionally imaginative special effects. What is odd is how much of it seems to be played for laughs. Nothing cuts the tension of global destruction like a joke, I guess, though it is possible that the frequent guffaws at the screening I attended were evoked unintentionally. But I suspect they were not.
Even as he invites us to contemplate a topic of unimaginable gravity, Mr. Emmerich (who wrote the script with Jerry Nachmanoff) tries to keep the mood light. Mr. Gyllenhaal has a way of infusing even his most desperate lines with a hint of knowing sarcasm, and some early scenes of wreckage -- especially the leveling of Hollywood, curiously enough -- are played almost like slapstick.
There are also a few interesting glimmers of satire. Some are a bit obvious, like the villainous figure of the vice president (Kenneth Welsh), who shrugs off environmental concerns and who is clearly smarter and more powerful than the callow, out-of-it commander in chief. The sight of hordes of Americans wading across the Rio Grande into Mexico, on the other hand, has a piquant quality.
The ending of ''The Day After Tomorrow'' reminds you that the aim of disaster movies is not so much to raise alarm as to dispense comfort. In this one everybody (except the vice president), behaves remarkably well, even when overcome with panic. There is hardly a moment of venality, irrationality or selfishness, and at the end we are soothed by the smiling faces of survivors and the recitation of lessons learned.
As the theme song from ''The Poseidon Adventure'' promised, ''There's got to be a morning after.'' Or as Susan Sontag put it, more cogently if less catchily, science fiction disaster films allow us to ''participate in the fantasy of living through one's own death and more, the death of cities, the destruction of humanity itself.'' When she wrote those words, in the 1960's, that fantasy had a morbid, anxious edge. But in ''The Day After Tomorrow'' those dark shadows have been scrubbed away, and the glacierization of half of the world's inhabited land is contemplated with barely a hint of horror. In fact, it looks kind of cool.
''The Day After Tomorrow'' 
~
Only the French, those self-proclaimed sages of ''l'amour fou,'' would dream of concocting a surreal romantic allegory like Yann Samuell's grown-up fairy tale, ''Love Me if You Dare.'' This rococo fantasy, tricked out with animation and with actors sailing like little Supermen through toy cutout clouds, belongs to the same school of whimsical excess as ''The Umbrellas of Cherbourg'' and ''Amélie.''
But as the movie glides along, its story turns considerably darker than those of its fluffy, candy-colored forerunners. Whether you find its dual resolution hopelessly pretentious or profound depends on your tolerance for a certain strain of Gallic sentimentality that takes itself more seriously than it lets on. Either way -- and I stand in the middle -- the film, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is bound to win some ardent champions.
To signify how very French it is, several versions of that Édith Piaf warhorse ''La Vie en Rose,'' including a semi-disco interpretation, thread insistently through the film. Eventually, the song's redundancy comes to suggest a ritual spritzing of Chanel perfume, like a national seal of approval, on packages stamped for export from Paris. Only Louis Armstrong's version, recorded in the late 1940's, infuses true romantic poetry into a film oversaturated with musical schmaltz.
The story, narrated in fits and starts by its protagonist, Julien (Guillaume Canet), follows the increasingly destructive games of one-upmanship he plays over three decades with his closest childhood friend, Sophie (Marion Cotillard). The two meet as 8-year-olds when Julien (Thibault Verhaeghe) comforts the girl, who is of Polish extraction, after her schoolmates' ethnic taunts, by giving her a tin box that resembles a toy merry-go-round.
Immediately, the two enter a private world in which they dare each other to carry out increasingly outrageous pranks, exchanging the talisman back and forth with each challenge. As the years pass, the dares escalate in danger, from naughty childhood pranks, like Julien's urinating in front of a grade-school principal and Sophie's wearing her brassiere over her sweater during an oral exam, to far more destructive acts. As college students, the pair, who have never been romantically involved but are as mutually possessive as any jealous lovers, goad each other to sleep with other people.
Extended deep into adulthood, the stakes escalate exponentially. When Julien seems about to propose to Sophie, who is ready to quit the game, he tricks her into accepting what turns out to be an invitation to witness his marriage to another woman. Long before this, Julien and Sophie have recognized that they are meant for each other. But partly out of pride and partly out of habit, perpetuating the game is easier than giving up the excitement it brings them.
The mature Sophie, with her seductive wiles and desperate, headstrong perversity, comes across as a spiritual cousin of Jeanne Moreau's Catherine in ''Jules et Jim.'' She is ultimately far more compelling (and scary) than Mr. Canet's bland Julien. Perpetually torn between the bourgeois values of his father (who loathes Sophie) and a game that he says he finds more thrilling than any drug, Mr. Canet lacks a certain demonic relish.
On a crude level, ''Love Me if You Dare'' is a parable of the battle of the sexes, engaged in an endless power struggle in which the balance continually shifts back and forth. On another, it portrays the insanity of any romantic quest in which the postponement of fulfillment becomes a desperate end in itself for people mortified by the prospect of boredom.
In the end, ''Love Me if You Dare'' compromises by offering alternative fantasy endings, one crazy, the other cozy. By this time, its romantic fools have created so much pain and chaos that their charm has evaporated. All that's left are two selfish monsters.
''Love Me if You Dare'' 
~
Like most sequels ''Shrek 2,'' which opens nationwide tomorrow, tries to compensate for potential lost novelty by taking everything people liked about the original and adding more. The prickly main characters, who since the first ''Shrek'' opened in 2001 have become cuddly plush toys, have returned: the grumpy title character (the voice of Mike Myers); his ogre princess bride, Fiona (Cameron Diaz); and of course the splendidly annoying Donkey (Eddie Murphy). The lessons that DreamWorks derived (and distorted) from William Steig's sublimely dyspeptic picture book are reiterated: be yourself; love yourself for who you are. For myself I accept ''Shrek 2'' for what it is -- a slick and playful entertainment that remains carefully inoffensive beneath its veneer of bad manners -- but I don't really love it.
The filmmakers have added a passel of new supporting characters, movie star voices and satiric targets. Whereas ''Shrek'' mocked the world of Disney (the former realm of the DreamWorks honcho Jeffrey Katzenberg), the sequel, directed by Andrew Adamson, Kelly Asbury and Conrad Vernon, widens its scope to Hollywood as a whole, here done up in medieval 3-D cartoon drag as a place called Far Far Away.
It seems that Fiona is the estranged princess of this land of high-end boutiques whose names seem more like sly product placements than actual jokes. She decides to reconcile with her parents (Julie Andrews and John Cleese) and to introduce them to her new husband. (Their first family meal is a bit like ''Guess Who's Coming to Dinner,'' but with an ogre.) Donkey of course tags along, now that his relationship with Dragon has hit the skids, and they are soon mixed up with a wily super-agentlike Fairy Godmother (Jennifer Saunders), whose spoiled and loutish frat-boy son, Prince Charming (Rupert Everett), was once betrothed to Fiona.
To get Shrek out of the picture, the King hires Puss in Boots, a swashbuckling hit-cat with the voice of Antonio Banderas. Once the honorable cat comes over to Shrek's side, Donkey complains that there's room for only one annoying talking animal sidekick. And he does have a point, though Mr. Banderas's campy suavity and Puss's convincingly animated fur add some new looks and rhythms to the formula.
While this ''Shrek'' revives the raucous spirit and winking allusiveness of its predecessor, some elements of the animation have advanced noticeably. The settings, especially the interiors of castle rooms and dim taverns, are lighted more realistically than in ''Shrek,'' and the flesh and fur, in their various hues, have a more lifelike texture. All of this gives the picture more visual warmth and richness, but in comparison to the most recent Pixar movies it still looks cold and stiff. The human characters in particular look like cheap knockoffs of the toys in the ''Toy Story'' movies.
In terms of its attitude toward the audience, DreamWorks 3-D animation is in some ways the opposite of Pixar, choosing to divide its viewers by age rather than uniting them. The music (including Butterfly Boucher's cover of David Bowie's ''Changes'' and a rendition by Mr. Banderas and Mr. Murphy of ''Livin' la Vida Loca''), the in-jokes and the occasional touches of bawdiness are intended to placate insecure adults while the bright colors and jaunty storytelling enchant their children and teach them to be themselves, like all the other kids with Shrek dolls and ears.
This kind of strategy is hardly uncommon in pop culture these days, and ''Shrek 2'' executes it with wit and aplomb. The script, by Mr. Adamson, Joe Stillman, J. David Stem and David N. Weiss, has jokes that grown-ups and precocious kids will congratulate themselves for getting, and plenty of broader humor (which actually works better). The movie's goal is to enchant children with an old-fashioned fairy tale while simultaneously mocking and subverting its fairy-tale and nursery-rhyme premises. This is sometimes enjoyable and genuinely imaginative (appearances by the Gingerbread Man, who looks like Mr. Bill of ''Saturday Night Live,'' and the Three Blind Mice are especially clever), but it also leaves a sour, cynical aftertaste.
Mr. Steig's ''Shrek'' is a celebration of ugliness that also happens to be one of the most beautiful children's books ever written, with respect both to its pictures and its prose. Of course it is unfair to compare that slim volume to the franchise it has spawned, which is a phenomenon in its own right. Certainly ''Shrek 2'' offers rambunctious fun, but there is also something dishonest about its blending of mockery and sentimentality. It lacks both the courage to be truly ugly and the heart to be genuinely beautiful.
''Shrek 2'' 
~
Directed by Daniel Taplitz
PG-13, 85 minutes
Jamie Foxx floats gracefully through the romantic comedy ''Breakin' All the Rules'' with a cocked eyebrow and the playful smirk of an overgrown adolescent. He's too canny to take the romantic sturm und drang swirling around him with less than a healthy grain of salt. The actor's deft touch lends the flighty story of mistaken identities and romantic mix-ups among mostly African-American characters in Los Angeles the kind of saucy bounce that Cary Grant lent to similar roles six decades ago.
Today, of course, screen characters fall in and out of bed with an ease that was unthinkable in the classic screwball era. That's why ''Breakin' All the Rules,'' which opens today nationwide, is much closer in spirit to the round-robin erotic sports of the much smarter and more socially conscious ''Shampoo.''
Even when the liaisons end messily, the players survive with only light bruises and scratches, their mating appetites whetted for more. In a recurrent joke that pays off, Mr. Foxx's character, Quincy Watson, maintains that only a crazy person -- in other words, a besotted fool in love -- would bite himself hard enough to break the skin. Quincy is endearing precisely because he's one of those fools.
He tumbles into trouble when his cowardly boss (Peter MacNicol) at Spoil magazine can't face the task of personally dismissing 15 percent of his staff and delegates the nasty job to Quincy. Although Quincy dutifully studies employment psychology, when ax-wielding time arrives he also chickens out and quits.
As it happens, Quincy's fiancée (Bianca Lawson) has just broken up with him and fled to Paris with someone else. Pulling himself together, Quincy melds his studies and the humiliation of being dumped into a best-selling manual on how to break up. The overnight expert suddenly finds himself everyone's consultant, including his nerdy ex-boss, who is desperate to shed a ruthless gold-digging girlfriend (Jennifer Esposito). Meanwhile, through mistaken identity, Quincy hooks up with Nicky (Gabrielle Union), the ambivalent fiancée of his cousin and best friend, Evan (Morris Chestnut), a serial seducer with a three-month limit on relationships.
''Breakin' All the Rules''is so determined to cross the finish line in 85 minutes that it doesn't pause for logic or psychological sense. Betrayals come and go so quickly that in 10 minutes yesterday's bruised ego has segued into today's crowing victory. It isn't the movie's predictable sorting out of its elaborate plot mechanics that lends ''Breakin' All the Rules'' a throwaway charm, but the urbane style the actors bring to their roles and the aerobically stimulating pace with which the director and screenwriter, Daniel Taplitz, discharges it all. I'd call it a medium-fast jog. Blithely leading the silly marathon is Mr. Foxx. He never misses a step.
''Breakin' All the Rules'' 
~
THIS war will never be forgotten. Nor will the heroes who fight in it.'' This line of dialogue expresses a thought that recurs frequently, with various inflections and in the mouths of various heroes, over the nearly two and a half hours of Wolfgang Petersen's ''Troy,'' which had its world premiere here last night and opens nationwide in the United States today. In one sense, it is less a prophecy than a statement of the obvious, since the names of Achilles, Hector, Odysseus and the rest have endured for 3,000 years. At the same time, though, the endless talk of immortality seems to express the picture's anxious, naïve ambition, which is to rise above the welter of summer blockbusters and ascend into the pantheon of movie classics.
This is most unlikely. ''Troy,'' which cost something approaching the gross national product of modern Greece, will be lucky to survive the arrival of ''Shrek 2'' on Wednesday. But for what it is -- a big, expensive, occasionally campy action movie full of well-known actors speaking in well-rounded accents -- ''Troy'' is not bad. It has the blocky, earnest integrity of a classic comic book, and it labors to respect the strangeness and grandeur of its classical sources. Some moments may make you rue the existence of cinema, or at least of movies with sound, since the dialogue often competes with James Horner's score for puffed-up obviousness. But there are others -- crisply edited combat sequences, tableaus of antique splendor, a hugely muscled Brad Pitt modeling the latest in Hellenic leisure wear -- that remind you why you like movies in the first place.
From its opening scenes, ''Troy,'' freely adapted by David Benioff from ''The Iliad'' and other sources, plunges you into a world shaped by complex codes of honor, loyalty and military virtue. Or, rather, it plunges you into a world where people talk about such things incessantly, and where every speech is punctuated by booming timpani and the ululations of an apparently tongueless female singer, her inarticulate moans announcing that this is not just a movie but an epic. Still, for once there really is a solid epic architecture underneath all the pageantry, and not just a very long movie set in the distant past.
Mr. Benioff's script, for all its line-by-line infelicities, shows a real fascination with Homer's great characters, and with the nexus of divided loyalties and competing ambitions that led to so much death and destruction. Unlike movies that take war as a simple contest of good and evil, ''Troy'' remains faithful to Homer (and to human nature) by understanding war as a political event, with plenty of viciousness and virtue to go around. Like his screenplay for Spike Lee's ''25th Hour'' (based on his own novel), ''Troy'' is fundamentally a story about treachery and brotherhood -- about the fallibility and fragile nobility of men.
In other words, it was not all Helen's fault. Helen, played by Diane Kruger, a German model, is perfectly lovely, and it is easy to see why she prefers the boyish Paris (Orlando Bloom) to grouchy Menelaus (Brendan Gleeson), the ruler of Sparta. But their puppyish romance is the trivial pretext for the war rather than its true cause. Menelaus's jealousy is exploited by his brother Agamemnon (Brian Cox), who uses the insult to further his imperial ambitions. His chief weapon is the sullen Achilles (Mr. Pitt), who in an early scene strolls out of his love tent, like a petulant movie star summoned from his trailer, to dispatch an enormous Thessalonian warrior with a single stroke of the sword.
Achilles' temperament -- a volatile mixture of vanity, cynicism and sentimentality -- is the key to the movie, and Mr. Pitt attacks the role with the same vigor and agility the character demonstrates in combat. Yes, his accent sounds a bit like Madonna's, perhaps in deference to the mostly English and Australian actors who make up most of the cast, but for once he does not seem embarrassed by his charisma, or driven to subvert it with actorish tics. Achilles' narcissism is like that of a modern celebrity: he fights because it will bring him fame, not to serve the gods or the glory of the Greek nation or, least of all, his corrupt king. His true loyalty is to individuals -- his beloved cousin Patroclus (Garrett Hedlund), his ruthless Myrmidons and his love interest, the captured Trojan priestess Briseis (Rose Byrne) -- rather than to causes.
His Trojan counterpart is Paris's brother, Hector (Eric Bana), who is constrained by the bonds of kinship, duty and patriotism that Achilles disdains. If Achilles is a kind of existentialist rock star, Hector is a stoical family man, protective of his wayward brother, respectful of his father, Priam (Peter O'Toole), and devoted to his wife, Andromache (Saffron Burrows) and their infant son. The events leading up to Hector's duel with Achilles -- a tempest of failure, deceit and unappeasable emotion -- are the beating heart of Homer's poem, and the filmmakers approach them with respectful sobriety, even going so far as to lower the volume on Mr. Horner's music. Mr. Bana, after his tentative superhero turn in ''The Hulk,'' shows more confidence here. His brooding, bearded countenance plays against Mr. Pitt's gleaming blondness, and the visual contrast emphasizes the differences between the characters.
Meanwhile, you can savor a generational contrast in acting styles whenever Mr. Cox or Mr. O'Toole appears onscreen. Mr. O'Toole, frail and pale-eyed, quavers and whispers his way through the movie with regal panache, and with that sly knack, common among British actors of a certain age, for seeming utterly aloof from the movie and at the same time utterly committed to it. Mr. Cox, for his part, never misses an opportunity to toss his impressive hair extensions and bellow like a beast of prey. If Odysseus hadn't thought up the Trojan Horse, this Agamemnon would have chewed through the walls of Troy all by himself.
Whether ''Troy'' will spur a revival of Hollywood interest in ancient literature remains to be seen, but the Greek and Roman canon is full of franchise potential, since it consists mainly of sequels, prequels and spin-offs. Some are signaled near the end of Mr. Petersen's film as the Greeks overrun the city. (What's your name, kid? Aeneas? Here, take this sword and go found another city somewhere else. Penelope? Yeah, it's Odysseus. Yeah. Bad connection. Listen, I'll be home soon. Who were you just talking to?) One notable sequel, however, has been foreclosed, by a killing that is certainly merited but that will nonetheless be surprising to scholars. I won't spoil it, but if I were Aeschylus, I'd call my agent.
''Troy'' 
~
''What are you, some kind of monsters?'' asks an exasperated commuter in ''New York Minute.'' The query, addressed to Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen, is surely meant as comic hyperbole, but just as surely, it will strike some in the audience as a rhetorical question.
Since they first appeared, sharing a single character, on the hideous sitcom ''Full House,'' the Olsens have waged their assault on American pop culture with frightening discipline and demonic intensity. A month shy of their 18th birthday, they are not only the stars of ''New York Minute,'' but its co-producers, too, and they also administer the kind of show-biz enterprise -- encompassing music, videos, fashion design and other merchandise -- that is habitually described as an empire.
But there is no reason to be scared. ''New York Minute,'' which opens today nationwide, has been made for the delight of school-age girls, but those who choose to interpret the Motion Picture Association of America's suggestion of parental guidance as an invitation to accompany their children will not suffer too badly. The Olsens are nothing if not professional, and the movie, directed by Dennie Gordon from a script by Emily Fox, Adam Cooper and Bill Collage, is polished and bouncy without being overly mawkish or unduly obnoxious. Above all, it is short.
Mary-Kate and Ashley play -- can you guess? -- twin sisters of contrasting temperament who spend a madcap day scrambling up and down the island of Manhattan, from Chinatown to Harlem, via foot, taxicab and the Toronto subway system. Jane (Ashley) is the uptight overachiever, with a color-coded day planner, a closet full of pastel business attire and a room decorated with Republican Party memorabilia. Roxy, whose political affiliations are not specified, is a rebellious rock 'n' roller who plays drums and wears black heavy-metal T-shirts. It is a big day for both of them: Jane must deliver the speech that could win her a scholarship to Oxford, and Roxy hopes to hand out demo CD's at a video shoot.
Together, pursued by a zealous truant officer (Eugene Levy), they set off from their Long Island home to the city of the title, land of colorful ethnic stereotypes.
In one remarkable scene, Roxy and Jane find their way to a Harlem beauty parlor, where a roomful of exuberant, hip-shaking African-American women give the bedraggled twins a series of makeovers (all free of charge), endowing them with that elusive quality known as bling. (This bit of hip-hop argot, as used in this movie, seems to mean, vaguely, having something to do with black people.)
Meanwhile, the girls are on the run not only from that officer, but also from a white limousine driver (Andy Richter) who speaks with a Charlie Chan accent because he is the adopted son of a Chinatown gangster matriarch. There are also, for good measure, a couple of out-of-town tourists in an enormous R.V., good-natured rubes who mistake Jane's climactic speech for a performance of ''Cats.''
A few surprisingly funny lines ring out in all this squeaky-clean silliness, and though I'm tempted to share them, I don't want to spoil what will be, for any adults still reading this, an afternoon of meager pleasures. The filmmakers handle the sentimental requirements of the plot -- a dead mother, an angry fight between two sisters who love each other deep down in spite of their differences, their subsequent discovery that they love each other deep down in spite of their differences -- about as summarily as I just did.
Mr. Levy is reliably funny, as is his Second City Television colleague Andrea Martin, playing a senator whose dog eats an important plot point and whose hunky son (Jared Padalecki) is one of two puppy-love interests.
The other (Riley Smith) is a dreamboat of a bike messenger who keeps running into Jane -- literally! -- in the most unlikely places.
While Ashley plays the more repressed Ryan sister, she is apparently the more exhibitionist Olsen. ''New York Minute'' opens with Jane's having the classic anxiety dream of appearing in front of an audience naked, after which the movie contrives to find her in the shower with Roxy's pet snake, to invent a wardrobe malfunction that removes half her skirt and sends her out into Midtown wearing nothing but a towel from the Plaza Hotel. The movie, evidently intended to make 11-year-old girls giddy with delight, also seems contrived to make their fathers feel like dirty old men. That, come to think of it, is a little bit scary.
''New York Minute'' 
~
The tart and often charming new comedy ''Mean Girls,'' which opens nationwide today, is a version of the heart-of-darkness teenage social comedy ''Heathers'' for the tweener audience. One of the few films that Lorne Michaels, the producer of ''Saturday Night Live,'' can be proud of, it has the ambitious and cartoony dark side of a Disney Channel sitcom, with a lively and talented young cast headed by the cherubic Lindsay Lohan.
Tina Fey, a performer and head writer for ''Saturday Night Live,'' has deftly adapted Rosalind Wiseman's nonfiction dissection of teenage girl societal interaction, ''Queen Bees and Wannabes: Helping Your Daughter Survive Cliques, Gossip, Boyfriends and Other Realities of Adolescence.'' Ms. Fey gives her screenplay a stylized vitality, though she adds a be-yourself finale that, while standard for such movies, doesn't seem in keeping with this picture.
It's the kind of bored manipulation you come to expect from the Plastics, the pack of hallway-shrewd and glamorous teenage queens who use subtle terror to rule the high school that Cady (Ms. Lohan) attends. It's her first brush with socialization, since Cady was home-schooled by her zoologist parents while traveling in Africa.
Since most of ''Mean Girls'' consists of the outsider Cady observing the tribal rites of her new setting and laying it all out in narration, this movie is just like home for the meticulous and ruthless deadpan that Ms. Fey has perfected for the satirical ''S.N.L.'' newscast in which she and Jimmy Fallon are the anchors. This also gives us a chance to see exactly how bright Cady is without a hint of condescension, because the conduct of American high school kids is totally foreign to her.
Cady calls high school ''a stressful, surreal blur.'' She can't do anything right, and a scene of her hiding during lunch and eating her sandwich in a stall has the feel of observation that Cameron Crowe went out of his way to develop in his nonfiction book ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High,'' which he adapted for the screen. ''Ridgemont High'' and ''Mean Girls'' share a fascination with the rules that simultaneously bind and separate high school students. But Ms. Fey is careful to mosey around the footfalls left by sharp and enduring teenage comedies like ''Ridgemont High'' and even ''Election'' without repeating their strategies.
Cady's potential is spotted by two warring factions. The goth-tinged and flamboyantly sour-tongued Janis Ian (a pinpoint-accurate turn by Lizzy Caplan) and her equally quick-witted gay friend, Damian (Daniel Franzese), take to Cady and walk their new friend through the school's societal minefield. ''You're a regulation hottie,'' assesses Janis.
Cady's innocent good looks also bring her to the attention of the regally self-infatuated Regina George (Rachel McAdams) and her fellow Plastics members Gretchen (Lacey Chabert) and Karen (Amanda Seyfried). Putting Cady through a down-low and low-down session of mind-games that serve as a de facto initiation, Regina decides reluctantly to offer the new girl a spot with the Plastics.
Cady's introduction to Regina and her squad ranks as a classic of comic tension. After Cady reveals a crush on Regina's ex, the decent Aaron (Jonathan Bennett), the twittering Gretchen tells Cady she can't act on it -- ''That's, like, the rule of Feminism.''
Janis and Damian encourage Cady to infiltrate the group so they can savor all the dirt their spy can uncover as well as set a divide-and-conquer plan in motion. As Cady steps into Plastic world, she ruefully questions its existence while happily caught in its gravitational pull. ''It was better to be in the Plastics, hating life,'' Cady notes with a hint of disbelief.
Though narrative cohesion isn't the strength of ''Mean Girls,'' which works better from scene to scene than as a whole, the intelligence shines in its understanding of contradictions, keeping a comic distance from the emotional investment of teenagers that defined ''Ridgemont High'' and later the adolescent angst movies of John Hughes. (Like Mr. Hughes's writing, Ms. Fey's combines comic practicality and a fascination with the cruelty born of suburban privilege.)
The sureness of tone in the script achieves such clarity that our sympathies remain with Cady even as she begins to become what she has beheld. She has a genuine taste for it, the trap for all double agents. (Sometimes, the film is like a teenage version of the undercover mob saga ''Donnie Brasco.'') But ''Mean Girls'' concentrates primarily on its eccentric and funny small touches, like an exchange between two jealous Korean girls or the electric car parked in Cady's parents' driveway.
Cady's loving but distracted mom and dad are played by Ana Gasteyer and Neil Flynn, who adds affection to the dizziness he shows as the janitor on ''Scrubs.'' Other ''S.N.L.'' cast members, past and present, include Ms. Gasteyer; Amy Poehler, flinging herself into playing Regina's desperate-to-be-cool mother; and, as the school principal, Tim Meadows, who reveals a savvy, weary dignity that he never had a chance to display in all his years on ''S.N.L.'' (These supporting performers are also skilled improvisational actors, like Ms. Fey, who shows up as a frazzled but sane teacher.)
The director, Mark Waters, working with a smart casting team, has assembled a superb group of players. Scene by scene you can't help being impressed by ''Mean Girls''; it's like a group of sketches linked by a theme, with some playing much better than others. For all its touches, the film does at times begin to seem as if it has the easily diverted attention span of one of its archetypal high school kids. You feel a little like a scold for wanting it to buckle down and concentrate.
''Mean Girls'' 
~
The most pertinent question posed by ''Bobby Jones: Stroke of Genius,'' a high-minded, lethally dull biography of the legendary golfer Bobby Jones, is whether a smidgen of the box-office magic of ''The Passion of the Christ'' has rubbed off on its star, Jim Caviezel. If Hollywood's biblical past tells us anything, my guess would be no.
''Bobby Jones,'' which opens nationwide today, is as reverent in its awed, Sunday-school way as ''The Passion of the Christ'' is in its furious, gory way. Bathed in sanctimony, Mr. Caviezel's Jones is a self-sacrificing hero who suffers in silence and appears so emotionally cauterized that he remains an enigma. The movie, directed by Rowdy Herrington, approvingly subscribes to the hero-as-masochist archetype by suggesting that all Jones's achievements were accomplished to satisfy others' expectations.
Mr. Caviezel's bland impenetrability may fit the screenplay's portrayal of Jones as a ferocious competitor who internalized stress and suffered physically for it, but his muted presence fails to create a compelling character. Even when Jones is in pain from varicose veins or excruciating stomach cramps, among other ailments, he suffers in emotional soft-focus.
By far the most colorful figure is Jones's rival, Walter Hagen (Jeremy Northam), a gentlemanly rogue who toots around in a flashy roadster with flask in hand and a twinkle in his eye. Unlike Jones, who never played golf for money, Hagen boasts that wealth is his major professional incentive. But he admires Jones's purity and even gives him a pair of gold cuff links as a token.
The movie, which wants to ennoble golf with the same spiritual mystique that ''Chariots of Fire'' brought to running, is even more hushed in tone than its prototype. Most of the mystical heavy lifting is done by the cinematographer Tom Stern and the composer James Horner, whose string-heavy score blankets the film in lofty, tastefully inspirational layers of gossamer laced with bagpipes and other Scottish flavors.
But no amount of gloss can conceal that golf isn't an especially cinematic sport. How many times can the camera admire a perfect swing that lofts the ball above the trees to gasping applause before a certain sameness sets in? And how many times can a movie wrest excitement over a miraculous recovery from inside a sand trap? Or follow a curving putt that miraculously finds its destination? The movie repeats these feats again and again, each time to more stultifying effect.
By the time Jones achieves the still unequaled feat of winning the Grand Slam (the British Amateur and Open and the American Amateur and Open tournaments within four months in 1930), the movie has squandered any suspense it might have mustered, and falls back on recycling the same old situations and buildups; only the stakes have been raised.
The misty-eyed portrait begins with Bobby as a sickly boy (Devon Gearhart) growing up in Georgia and attracted to the sport. By the time he's 14, he has grown into an adolescent prodigy (Thomas Lewis). His first major challenge is to learn to control his temper when he flubs a shot and not to curse and walk off the field. Later the movie observes his shy courtship of the sheltered Mary (Claire Forlani), which culminates in a kiss discreetly covered by an umbrella. The movie gently suggests that until his retirement at 28, Jones's obsession with golf was a thorn in his wife's side. Just when their happily-ever-after begins, the movie ends.
''Stroke of Genius'' is so sports-centered that Jones's academic achievements -- he earned a degree in mechanical engineering from Georgia Tech, another in classics from Harvard and passed the bar -- are barely noted. In the same spirit as ''The Legend of Bagger Vance,'' which includes some of the same characters and which landed in a commercial sand trap, ''Stroke of Genius'' operates on the delusion that Golf Is Life. It isn't.
''Bobby Jones: Stroke of Genius'' 
~
In the portentous and quickly disappointing thriller ''Godsend,'' even a kid's birthday party is lighted like a beyond-the-grave spectacular or a wedding in ''The Godfather.'' This illogical but juicy bad-vibe opening suggests that the director Nick Hamm is going to provide some handsomely mounted scares.
The birthday party of 8-year-old Adam Duncan (Cameron Bright), whose enormous ice-blue eyes dominate his face, is being held at night; you expect social workers to come in and lecture his parents, Paul (Greg Kinnear) and Jessie (Rebecca Romijn-Stamos). The Duncans do beam over their little boy's happiness, but the specter of doubt already looms over the festivities. Paul, who teaches high school biology in an urban high school, has been offered a teaching job at a safer suburban site and is guilt-ridden over the prospect of taking it.
''He's wrestling with his conscience,'' says Jessie, a line that, like most in the film, has ominous overtones.
After Adam dies in a horrible accident, his grief-stricken parents are approached at the cemetery by the eminent genetic scientist Dr. Richard Wells (Robert De Niro); this movie is filled with such over-the-top scenes, somberly photographed by the adept cinematographer Kramer Morgenthau.
''I'm sorry,'' Wells says. ''I know this is a terrible time.'' With a beard framing his jaw line, Mr. De Niro isn't playing a character named Louis Cyphre, as he was in ''Angel Heart,'' but it seems obvious that he is -- to use an old-movie title -- the Devil, probably. Wells pounces on Paul and Jessie with the offer to clone their dead son from one of the boy's cells. ''Illegal, not to mention potentially immoral,'' Paul responds.
The film is packed with so many lines bound to be repeated in giggle fits at parties -- Jessie even takes the time to say ''Something's wrong,'' as she shrieks with pain while giving birth to Adam II -- that it doesn't even require Bette Davis striding into the frame with a hand on her hip and a cigarette holder clenched between her teeth to certify its campiness.
The script, by Mark Bomback, starts with such a good idea -- parents so devastated that they ultimately feel compelled to make a deal to obtain an exact replica of their lost child -- that you give ''Godsend'' the benefit of the doubt for much longer than it deserves. The concept has the close-to-the-bone gloom of an Ira Levin novel.
The subject alone gives ''Godsend,'' which opens nationwide today, the makings of a strong and unnerving psychological drama, but the haunted-house staging indicates that the narrative isn't headed in the direction of philosophical underpinnings. (The tantalizing and effectively overheated trailer, which has been running since last fall, when ''Godsend'' was supposed to be released, also gives the game away.)
Mr. Hamm doesn't rob Mr. Kinnear and Ms. Romijn-Stamos of the opportunity to show some sensitivity. Still, any movie that features a caring and solicitous Robert De Niro should set off as many alarms for his victims as it does for the audience.
As the second Adam, who is his predecessor's twin emotionally and physically, hits the age at which the original Adam died, he's consumed by nightmares, and the film drops into its second-rate horror-movie flailings, and failings.
''Godsend'' meanders into a predictable ending -- or, to be more specific, several -- that will leave you wondering how it managed to squander such a sensational premise. The distended final section makes the movie feel as if it were even second-guessing itself, trying things on and discarding them with a weary desperation. The picture, which fails to achieve its ambitions or to fulfill our expectations, is ultimately worse than a violent piece of hack work, in which the director isn't interested in displaying his integrity -- or taste. You'd be better off downloading the trailer: a much more convincing piece of storytelling.
''Godsend'' 
~
The only grotesque extravagance missing from the estate of Nick Vanderpark (Jack Black), the overnight zillionaire who bounces through ''Envy'' like a big gurgling baby, is a statue of Michelangelo's David urinating vodka. Nick has acquired everything else imaginable: an ugly, out-of-place mansion in the San Fernando Valley surrounded by power lines; a white horse named Corky that gobbles up the neighbors' apples; an indoor bowling alley next to the dining room; a glittering carousel that malfunctions; an elaborate archery range; and a bed so enormous it makes him look like the Incredible Shrinking Man.
Nick's instant wealth has been acquired thanks to his patenting of Vapoorize, an aerosol spray that, when applied to dog feces (or any other kind), makes poo go poof; one little spritz and the stuff magically evaporates. Once you've caught a glimpse of the mansion's hideous dog-theme interior decorations, an immediate application of a designer's version of Vapoorize seems called for.
The notion of such a product arriving in an environment overstuffed with useless junk, along with its inventor's conspicuous consumption, offers ripe possibilities for a sharp satire of upward mobility in our consumer society. Nick's wife, Natalie (Amy Poehler), adapts to her glossy lifestyle with a vengeance. Flaunting enough jewelry to make Ivana Trump look like Mother Teresa, she decides to run for the California State Senate on an environmental plank. But her campaign is vehemently opposed by demonstrators whose placards ask (in obscene slang) where all that Vapoorized waste product goes. By the end of the movie that question is partially answered.
Sadly, most of the Swiftian promise of ''Envy'' is squandered in foolish horseplay and on a story that zigzags so far out of control that it feels as if the screenwriter, Steve Adams, pasted together a bunch of zany notions in a frantic search for confusion.
Living across the street from Nick is Tim Dingman (Ben Stiller). his best friend and former co-worker at a sandpaper company. The more largess Nick throws Tim's way, the more envious and resentful Tim grows. He, too, could have been a zillionaire had he invested only $2,000 in Vapoorize, but he declined the invitation, and now his wife, Debbie (Rachel Weisz), desperate for some liposuction, won't let him forget it.
One night, drunk on a bottle of wine from Nick's private vineyard, Tim picks up a bow and arrow, shoots it into the air, and accidentally kills his friend's beloved horse. Here the comedy nosedives into a chaotic farce about secretly burying, then exhuming the animal to claim a reward. The catalyst for the movie's middle third is a mysterious, slightly demonic drifter with long stringy hair who calls himself the J-Man (Christopher Walken) and appoints himself Tim's adviser.
As Nick's unwavering loyalty and generosity eat at Tim's guilty conscience, the movie also turns into a forced, unconvincing morality play about honesty and friendship. Nick's total obliviousness to his friend's jealousy is ludicrous. How much smarter and funnier ''Envy'' might have been had Nick taken a certain nasty pleasure in lording it over his buddy.
The movie, directed by Barry Levinson, plays like his attempt to match the Farrelly Brothers in adolescent goofiness, and there are some laughs. Like ''There's Something About Mary'' it includes a sardonic intermittent commentary in a song by Mark Mothersbaugh. Whenever the energy flags, another version of the song, drawled by Dan Navarro in a disingenuous vocal smirk, fills the gap.
But the performances never harmonize. Mr. Stiller plays Tim like an earnest leading man. Mr. Black, riding the success of ''School of Rock,'' has much less to do in this movie than in his last. Nick is a cheery blank who gets blubbery about the disappearance of his horse and otherwise behaves like a goofy, trusting 9-year-old. None of Mr. Black's rock 'n' roll ferocity is allowed to detonate.
''Envy,'' which opens today nationwide, is really a movie that's afraid of itself. Rather than explore the funny side of Schadenfreude, it evades it by taking desperate farcical tangents, as though the subject were too serious for comedy.
''Envy'' 
~
In the opening title sequence of ''Laws of Attraction,'' little golden bubbles float upward to a satiny Champagne score (by Edward Shearmur), but the movie never makes good on this promise of effervescence. This is too bad, because the two principal actors in this watery romantic comedy, which opens nationwide today, make you wish it were better.
As Daniel Rafferty, a dashing divorce lawyer, Pierce Brosnan, with a hint of James Bond swagger, continues his run as a late-blooming, grown-up sex symbol. He is far more appealing in middle age than he was in his pseudo-Bond ''Remington Steele'' youth. And it is a relief to see Julianne Moore doing something onscreen besides suffer.
Her character, Audrey Woods, also a divorce lawyer, is at first so antiromantic that she refuses even to discuss the possibility of dating. Given Ms. Moore's attractiveness, this may seem wildly implausible -- in any case it is never explained --unless it is a reaction to some of her recent roles. If you had endured the marital agonies of ''Far From Heaven,'' ''The Hours'' and ''Safe,'' you might be a little gun-shy, too.
But of course Audrey's tough shell exists only to be pierced, as it were, by Daniel's rascally charm. In time-honored screwball fashion, the script, by Aline Brosh McKenna and Robert Harling, casts its lovers as professional adversaries. They meet in court, spar and banter and double-cross (in front of a dour judge played by Nora Dunn) and then, before you know it, he sweeps her off her feet (and also, perhaps, vice versa).
And -- as we are not quite back in the winking, Rock Hudson-Doris Day era of the Production Code, which this picture occasionally evokes -- to bed they go after a drunken evening at an ethnic restaurant. (Audrey is one of those ultracosmopolitan ''Sex and the City'' Manhattan women who are freaked out by noisy Cuban restaurants, to say nothing of the streets of Chinatown, where Daniel keeps his disheveled office.)
When the two repeat this indiscretion after sampling the local moonshine at a rustic pub in Ireland, they wake up with wedding rings on their fingers, a development that nods playfully toward the old days, when, in the movies at least, one-night stands were unthinkable without benefit of clergy.
Unfortunately, in trying to update the naughty sparkle of the studio days to our own more permissive but more anxious and less well-written times, ''Laws of Attraction,'' like the somewhat better ''Intolerable Cruelty,'' seems desperately unsure of itself at crucial moments.
The screenwriters and the director, Peter Howitt (''Sliding Doors,'' ''Johnny English''), appear to have no clue about how modern adults might feel or behave, and they are too timid to poke fun at any but the easiest targets. Parker Posey as a bratty fashion designer and Michael Sheen as her soon-to-be-ex-husband, a loutish British rock star, try valiantly to inject a bit of broad comic liveliness into the overly polite proceedings. But their characters are so stale and secondhand that they might have stepped out of a recent Woody Allen picture.
As Audrey's mother, Frances Fisher, a mere eight years older than Ms. Moore, fares a little better. The character is a serenely shallow plastic-surgery addict. (''The girls and I are having a lip party,'' she informs her appalled daughter.) But Ms. Fisher plays her with a smooth, unflappable dignity that reminds you of Agnes Moorehead.
Still, the efforts of the cast are not enough to lift ''Laws of Attraction'' above the cautious banality of a midseason replacement sitcom. The real problem is that despite game, charming performances from Mr. Brosnan and Ms. Moore, you never feel the urgency of Daniel and Audrey's rivalry or the attraction that springs from it.
''Laws of Attraction'' 
~
''We need to remember what used to be good,'' says a character in the director Gary Winick's new comedy, ''13 Going on 30.'' That's not exactly the smartest remark to include in a movie that is essentially a retread of the Tom Hanks body-switch comedy ''Big.''
Even the advertising for ''13 Going on 30,'' which opens nationwide today, suggests a third-generation color photocopy: the poster, in which the willowy star Jennifer Garner swings around a street sign in a slip and polka-dotted spring coat, looks like a Target ad.
But this Junior Miss you-can-have-it-all sprightliness doesn't overwhelm the breeziness of Mr. Winick's direction. What keeps the picture going is his love for actors, and his refusal to judge them by the characters they play. Even the villainous villainess, the skittish, neurotic career woman Lucy, is treated with admiration for her talents. (She is played by Judy Greer, a crafty performer with swift reflexes who gets more laughs out of cranky insecurity that she has a right to.)
Any movie that telegraphs its fondness for its cast automatically has something going for it that is rare in contemporary comedy: this isn't one of those movies in which most of the actors steer clear of upstaging the star.
This directorial generosity, a few songs from the toddler days of MTV and a few other fillips of cleareyed charm go a long way toward making up for the tiredness of the concept: a kid's magically leapfrogging into the body of an adult. In this case, it's 13-year-old Jenna (Christa B. Allen), who in 1987 is suffering through a miserable failure of a birthday.
Her chubby pal Matt (Sean Marquette) has a not-so-secret crush on her: his birthday gift is a dollhouse, a miniature home for them in the future, and the care he has bestowed on building this model suggests that he might be an incipient metrosexual, at the very least. When the remainder of her birthday celebration crashes and burns, she ends up hiding in a closet chanting, ''I wanna be 30 and flirty and thriving.''
When the magic dust that Matt also gave her -- a gift that seems to indicate other things about him that the movie never deals with -- lands on Jenna's carefully moussed hair, she awakens as a 30-year-old version of herself, in 2004.
As acted by Ms. Garner, the older Jenna has a coltish gawkiness that is never quite sublimated; she plays Jenna as someone who is secretly peeking inside her own head and can't contain her giddiness. As a performer Ms. Garner is a bit of a showoffy thoroughbred, but her self-regard fits into the portrayal of Jenna, who can't keep from gazing at reflections of her magnificent triceps.
Jenna's intense girlishness becomes a concentrated daydream; it's the way she pays attention to the world. Although Ms. Garner seems conscious of this, she throws herself into the role in a way the flamboyant paranoia of the television show ''Alias'' never allows her to do. Jenna recites the lyrics of ''Love Is a Battlefield'' as if she had just jotted them down herself.
Of course, much of the comedy involves her discomfort in dealing with adult sexuality and with new technology, like the musical ring of cellphones. It's too bad she wasn't perplexed by people's seemingly talking to themselves while walking. (Still, taking on these too-young-for-one's-older-body roles seems to release something in actors generally and Ms. Garner specifically: it makes her self-consciousness engaging.) The contrived surprises come in scenes that seem to have been created by separate writers, though the script is credited to Josh Goldsmith and Cathy Yuspa.
The obvious laughs are wrung from the contrast of an inexperienced child in a mature body, as Jenna bobs through a world in which the supposed adults turn out to be more childish than she is. ''I am Jenna Rink, big-time magazine editor,'' Jenna tells herself, as she now works for Poise, the fashion publication she adored as a child.
When dealing with Jenna's work week, the movie feels like a combination of ''Big'' and the television series ''Suddenly Susan.'' Jenna brings her energetic naïveté to Poise, starting with her arrival on the dance floor of a party. As ''Thriller'' plays, she unashamedly leads the entire room through a zombie stomp that recreates the music's video. Her unvarnished pleasure is picked up by everyone.
She seeks out the grown-up Matt (Mark Ruffalo), and his drowsy-cool voice and untroubled presence take Jenna down a few notches. He is the boyfriend-as-daddy figure, a cool hand on a fevered forehead, though Mr. Ruffalo adds a curiosity that is piqued by Jenna.
The performances give the movie more flavor and life than the situation does; it often feels like prechewed Bubble Yum. The message of the plot is that a lack of sophistication is the key to success, even at a fashion magazine that attracts readers through sexy exhibitionism. The movie would have shown some daring savvy if it had played more with the role-playing aspect of fashion spreads. Instead it is content to eat its retro snack cake and have it, too. ''Let them eat Twinkies,'' the movie suggests, instead of getting into dicier issues.
The film ''13 Going on 30'' 
~
''Man on Fire,'' a new child-endangerment thriller starring Denzel Washington, was originally scheduled to open nationwide on Friday, but 20th Century Fox decided, rather suddenly, to push its New York and Los Angeles debut forward by two days. Perhaps the studio reasoned that it would be unfair to make moviegoers in the nation's two largest cities, their blood lust aroused by ''Kill Bill: Vol. 2'' and ''The Punisher,'' wait an entire week for the next round of righteous killing.
Like those two movies, ''Man on Fire,'' directed by Tony Scott from a script by Brian Helgeland, is about the grim duty (which is to say the gory pleasure) of vengeance. The first act, a moody, foreboding adventure in high-risk baby-sitting, exists to provide a moral and emotional pretext for the blood bath that follows. John Creasy (Mr. Washington), a veteran of some kind of too-secret-to-mention military operations, drifts down to Mexico in a depressive alcoholic haze. With the help of an old war buddy (Christopher Walken), he is hired as a bodyguard by a wealthy couple in Mexico City who worry that their young daughter, Pita (Dakota Fanning), will become the target of kidnappers.
Needless to say, she does. But first her precocious cutie-pie spunkiness softens Creasy's morose demeanor. Initially resistant to her overtures, he eventually becomes her swimming coach, homework tutor and all-around best pal, while her parents (Marc Anthony and Radha Mitchell) skulk away on mysterious trips. Mr. Washington and Ms. Fanning (who played Sean Penn's daughter in ''I Am Sam'') are both instinctive stereotype-smashers, and their easy, skillful rapport gives the picture's sentimental first half more credibility than it deserves.
Mr. Scott, meanwhile, with his characteristic blend of cynicism and heavy-handedness, infuses even the quietest moments with nerve-jangling dread. His fondness for intrusive, fake-stylish camera tricks -- jump cuts, speeded-up montages, abrupt changes in light, color saturation and focal depth -- has overwhelmed whatever story sense he once possessed.
This time, like an art student discovering, a decade too late, that it's cool to incorporate text into images, he flashes subtitles across the middle of the screen, in a variety of sizes and type faces, not only translating the Spanish dialogue but also spelling out some choice lines of English as well.
This is mystifying, but also typical of the garish, extravagant literal-mindedness that governs ''A Man on Fire.'' Once little Pita is snatched, in slow motion and a hail of bullets, from her piano lesson, the only question is whether this will be a story of rescue or of revenge. It doesn't really matter, since the bad guys will get their grisly comeuppances in either case.
Mr. Washington, lumbering into action-hero mode, trades in his nuances for shotguns, grenade launchers and other heavy weapons as well as less explosive but nonetheless useful tools of the trade, like duct tape and a folding knife.
''He's an artist of death,'' says Mr. Walken, whose character has sworn off killing, ''and he's about to paint his masterpiece.''
And so Creasy, with minimal suspense and maximum sadism, goes after the kidnapping ring that terrorizes Mexico City. He is helped by a crusading journalist (Rachel Ticotin) and her sometime lover, the city's only honest law enforcement agent (Giancarlo Giannini). As Creasy wades into battle, images of Pita flash before our eyes, her innocent sweetness both a pointed contrast to the depravity of her abductors and a justification for their agony.
This is a time-tested movie con, but rarely has it been deployed so contemptibly. You can relish the sight of a lowlife's fingers being amputated one by one, his wounds cauterized by a dashboard cigarette lighter without guilt because, after all, he was involved in harming a child. And if you object, then you're not only some kind of wishy-washy due-process wimp, but you also probably condone the kidnapping of little girls. (Mr. Scott, for his part, shows a borderline creepy fondness for filming them in bathing suits.)
''Kill them all,'' Pita's mother hisses when she learns of Creasy's plan. In the same scene we learn that she has been reading his Bible, a book he consults and occasionally quotes, though it may be a different version than the one I'm familiar with. I've combed through both testaments, and I can't find the verse that seems to be Creasy's favorite -- the one that says: if your enemy smites you on one cheek, rig a tube full of plastic explosive to his body, tie him to the hood of a car and light the fuse.
''Man on Fire'' 
~
The brassy cross-dressing farce ''Connie and Carla'' shows that Hollywood still gets the jitters about gender-bending. Forgetting that a daily parade of sexual and sartorial hybrids troops through the country's living rooms on shows like Jerry Springer's, it exhibits Hollywood's usual two-faced attitude when dealing with gender and sexual role-playing.
On the one hand this comedy, in which two women on the run from mobsters pose as drag performers, exhibits a 1950's sense of shock. That prudishness is embodied in the leaden performance of David Duchovny as Jeff, the clueless straight brother of Peaches (Stephen Spinella), a drag performer. On the other it leaps onto a soapbox and preaches tolerance and brotherly love with a vague, overcompensating stridence.
These contradictions are subsumed under a potentially marketable high concept: ''Some Like It Hot'' meets ''Victor/Victoria'' in the land of ''As You Like It.'' Here Shakespeare's Forest of Arden becomes a West Hollywood drag club where Connie (Nia Vardalos) and Carla (Toni Collette), two bedraggled veterans of the dinner-theater circuit, become overnight (and highly unlikely) cult stars by posing as gay drag performers. The club is heavily patronized by Hollywood's most convenient and tiresome gay stereotype: hunky men who worship Barbra Streisand and seem to have memorized every song from every Broadway musical ever produced.
That stereotype is one of the many stock illusions that ''Connie and Carla,'' directed by Michael Lembeck from a screenplay by Ms. Vardalos, juggles in its amiably dizzy way. Its silliest illusion, which exempts it from any credibility whatever, is that these women, simply by painting their faces as clowns, donning oversize wigs, adopting flamboyant, camp mannerisms and lowering their voices a notch (when they remember to), could pass as men in drag for even a second.
The next silliest is that Connie and Carla could wow the audience in a club devoted to lip-synching by singing instead of mouthing the words. As a female vocal duo, their performances are passable, if a little dull and lacking in any sense of camp exaggeration. Their supposedly showstopping routines are entirely conventional. Only after their show has been expanded with the inclusion of real-life drag performers into a Broadway salute, in which Debbie Reynolds puts in a two-fisted cameo appearance, does it perk up mightily.
But enough quibbling. ''Connie and Carla,'' which opens today nationwide, knows it has only the most tenuous connection to the real world and doesn't care. It is really the latest manifestation of a Hollywood minigenre filtered through Billy Wilder, Blake Edwards, Mike Nichols and Frank Oz by way of Shakespeare and through the soothing hand of Ms. Vardalos, the endearing comic actress who created and starred in ''My Big Fat Greek Wedding.'' She brings to the genre the same warmhearted ebullience and sense of people as one big, happy (if eccentric) family that lent ''My Big Fat Greek Wedding'' such mass appeal. But because ''Connie and Carla'' is not a variation of her own life story, it obviously lacks the same intimacy.
As a drag performer, Ms. Collette's Carla (who at times resembles John Epperson as Lypsinka) is far more adroit at caricature. For one thing, her popping cornflower eyes, wide-open grin and flailing dramatic style are already larger than life. Ms. Vardalos's milder-mannered Connie suggests a homier, drag version of Kathy Najimy with a smirk that evokes traces of Mary Martin and Phyllis Diller.
When first encountered, the two women, who have performed together since childhood, are delivering a pastiche of Broadway standards in a Chicago lounge to an indifferent audience, during which they frantically (and amusingly) switch hairstyles to match their characters. But after witnessing their boss's murder by a drug lord, they flee, unwittingly carrying a kilo of his cocaine, and land in West Hollywood. In the movie's formulaic romantic subplot, Connie develops a crush on Jeff, who (in shades of ''Yentl,'' a frequent cross-reference) doesn't realize she's a woman.
The movie has tired running jokes, like Jeff's pratfalls whenever Connie bumps into him. But it also has some good ones. In the wittiest, the killer's henchman, ordered to scour America's dinner theaters for the fugitives, finds himself joining senior sing-alongs of Jerry Herman's ''Mame'' in every theater he visits. The frequent exposures soften him up and almost turn him into a nice guy. Almost.
''Connie and Carla'' 
~
The Punisher, a Marvel Comics crime fighter introduced in 1974, is unusual among superheroes (especially Marvel colleagues like Spiderman, the Hulk and the X-Men) for his lack of super powers. His grim, brutal crusade against sundry wrongdoers is enabled not by spider sense or superhuman strength, but by guns, military training and righteous fury.
Jonathan Hensleigh's movie version of the Punisher's origins stays true to its hero by being similarly stripped-down, efficient and mean. At a time when comic-book film adaptations have become showcases for the latest computer-assisted special effects, ''The Punisher,'' which opens today nationwide, is a straightforward, somewhat old-fashioned action picture, full of gunfire and hand-to-hand combat, leading to a climax in which several dozen cars explode. The only unusual gadget the hero employs is a portable fire hydrant, which may have some potential as a merchandising tie-in.
In any case, ''The Punisher,'' loaded with grim, sadistic violence and more than two hours long, certainly lives up to its name. Played with unsmiling determination by Tom Jane, who exhibits none of the loose charm he showed as Mickey Mantle in ''61*'' on HBO, the Punisher starts out as Frank Castle, a Special Forces veteran just retired from the F.B.I. His last undercover operation resulted in the accidental death of a suspect who happens to have been the beloved son of a ruthless nightclub owner, money launderer and corporate mogul named Howard Saint.
As Saint, John Travolta, a lock of long hair perpetually threatening to fall over his eyes, basically reprises his villainous turn from the toxic ''Swordfish'' a few years back, with family feeling replacing greed as the character's primary motive for evil-doing. Urged on by his wife (Laura Harring), Saint takes revenge on Castle by wiping out his whole extended family during a reunion in Puerto Rico.
Among the dead are Castle's wife (Samantha Mathis), father (Roy Scheider) and young son (Marcus Johns). Mother and son are shown in desperate and prolonged flight from their fates in a scene meant to emphasize the depraved cruelty of the bad guys and to justify the bloody payback that follows.
Throughout the picture, we are repeatedly invited to see just how much pleasure the Punisher's enemies -- in particular, Saint's right-hand baddie, Quentin Glass (Will Patton) -- take in inflicting pain on their victims, so that we can savor the prospect of punishment to follow. But the moral boundary that separates the Punisher -- or, for that matter, the filmmakers -- from his prey is vaporous, since his acts of vengeance match or exceed the original crimes in their grisly ingenuity.
Of course, to make such a point is to entertain nuances and distinctions for which ''The Punisher'' has no use. Its lack of subtlety is clearly a point of pride, and Mr. Hensleigh's flat-footed, hard-punching style has a blunt ferocity that makes ''Kill Bill'' look like ''In the Bedroom.'' A few set pieces were clearly meant to have a grisly, Tarantinoesque wit; it hardly seems coincidental that the movie's coldblooded torture artiste is named Quentin. But lightness is not among Mr. Hensleigh's gifts. Making his directorial debut after a successful run as a screenwriter and producer (on projects like ''Die Hard With a Vengeance,'' ''Jumanji'' and ''The Rock'') he has clearly conceived ''The Punisher'' as a throwback to the leathery, angry urban revenge movies of the 1970's.
In the ''Dirty Harry'' and ''Death Wish'' pictures of that era -- also the time of the Punisher's comic-book birth -- gracelessness functioned as a sign of macho integrity. The movie comes closest to honoring this tradition in its less operatic sequences (and in one that involves a wall-smashing fight scored to ''La donna è mobile''), which is also when it approaches the moodiness and eccentricity of the best Marvel comics.
The Punisher, holed up in a warehouse in a gritty part of Tampa, is befriended by his neighbors, three bohemian misfits played by Ben Foster, Jon Pinette and Rebecca Romijn-Stamos. Their quirky harmlessness and easy recognition of Castle as a fellow outsider give a touch of sweetness and humanity to a movie that is otherwise remorselessly ugly and punishingly inhumane.
''The Punisher'' 
~
What the underwhelming 2000 harried-by-the mob comedy ''The Whole Nine Yards'' had going for it was chemistry. Blended with Bruce Willis's dry, threatening assurance, Matthew Perry's neurotic, stammering pratfalls made a rosy Cosmopolitan. (It was even funnier to think that, a decade earlier, Mr. Willis might have played the Perry role.)
Their clicking made that movie popular and made a sequel seem welcome, if not inviting. Yet that sequel -- ''The Whole Ten Yards,'' which opens nationwide today -- is more afterthought than accomplishment, a cocktail made with orange juice and Champale instead of actual bubbly. At least it isn't a remake -- though given how slovenly and forced this movie is, maybe that wouldn't have been such a bad idea.
Mr. Willis is back as the saturnine hit man Jimmy (the Tulip) Tudeski. Tucked away in a witness relocation resort-style home in Mexico that should come with a gift shop, Jimmy is now devoted to being a domestic diva. He putters around the house cooking up a storm, as well as cleaning and straightening with a ferocity that suggests he is trying to eliminate evidence. Jill (Amanda Peet), now his wife, has taken on Jimmy's mantle as torpedo, or is trying to; she shows desire, though not skill.
And the dentist Oz Oseransky (Mr. Perry) is simply trying the patience of his wife, Cynthia (Natasha Henstridge). Their Brentwood home is a security hustler's dream, packed to the rafters with monitors, cameras and other comforting surveillance devices after his experience with Jimmy. Cynthia is bored, despite Oz's energetic fidgeting and skittishness, which is now so broad that someone could stage a telethon on his behalf.
In ''Nine Yards'' -- among other things -- Oz helped Jimmy out by supplying him with phony dental records so that flights of angels could sing him to his rest: fake rest that is, since Jimmy wanted to retire from tagging toes, but with a big score. Now Lazlo Gogolak, newly released from prison, is determined to find Jimmy and take his revenge for Jimmy's role in the murder of Lazlo's son, Yanni.
As played by Kevin Pollak, Lazlo is a series of comic tics that include a mangled accent, malapropisms and an assaultive temper that leads him to pound his remaining son, Strabo (Frank Collison), who often deserves it. Strabo is a sad-faced lunkhead who seems to be outfitted with Arsenio Hall's old wardrobe. Oddly, Lazlo comes equipped with a studied, sly arrogance that, on its own, could work if it didn't contradict his Inspector Gadget-style overplaying.
Oz needs Jimmy to help recover Cynthia, whom Lazlo has kidnapped to bring Jimmy out of hiding; she has been abducted by Lazlo's phalanx of button men, who treat her almost as well as Oz.
The plotting of the second ''Yards'' isn't lazy, and there's one reasonably well-thought-out twist by the screenwriter, George Gallo. But Howard Deutch's staging has the cast members flailing about as if they were trying to be recruited for the next season of ''The Apprentice.'' In the earlier film Mr. Willis had Jimmy's benign chilliness worked out so thoroughly that Mr. Perry's unnerved shimmying seemed a natural response. He was a jittery pilot fish, or at least a live-action SpongeBob SquarePants, to Mr. Willis's Great White.
But the relentless -- and unrelentingly bland -- plot curlicues shove Mr. Willis into acting out, mourning the loss of his manhood. Jill tells him that he's ''shooting blanks'' in the paternity sweepstakes. The picture features a bewildering outbreak of distemper, too; there's so much bellowing that the movie seems to predate Dolby or, at the very least, be under the mistaken impression that the dialogue is so good it needs to be heard three multiplexes over.
When the actors aren't slugging one another -- obviously to soften the Wes Craven-style bloodshed of the original, and guide the picture into a more inclusive PG-13 rating -- they're spritzing sarcasm that serves as a substitute for characterization. Ms. Peet's sweet avidity has been reduced to Jill's taunting her husband.
In addition, the film's frenetic pacing is wearying. After a while you begin to hope that Lazlo's lovely collection of land yachts will be spared abuse; he has a vintage Mercedes 600 stretch limo and an old, black Chrysler Imperial with voluminous fins that Herman Melville never quite got around to writing about.
Of course, there's yet another swindle involving a chunk of dough roughly equivalent to Mr. Perry's haul from his final season of ''Friends.'' I guess it's just not enough to skin the mob; ''The Whole Ten Yards'' needs to fleece the audience as well. Maybe unlucky moviegoers can join organized crime in a class-action suit.
''The Whole Ten Yards'' 
~
Though ''The Girl Next Door,'' a naughty new comedy that opens nationwide today, concerns the behavior of porn stars, it is unlikely to be mistaken for a pornographic movie. The scenarios those films tend to explore are far more plausible (if rather mundane), and the writing generally shows a higher level of literary refinement. Or so I'm told. But this teasing, sleazy little movie does provide some insight into current cultural attitudes about pornography -- and, perhaps more generally, about sex. Its own feverish confusion, that is, may be an accurate reflection of a social landscape that includes both abstinence-only sex education and ''Girls Gone Wild.''
Matt (Emile Hirsch) is a high-achieving, dutiful high school senior who gazes longingly at the hedonistic antics of the jocks, the cool kids and the popular babes (all of whom look about 10 years older than he does), wishing he had the nerve to cut loose and be free. Like a live-action Jimmy Neutron, Matt, a handsome, well-adjusted young man, comes equipped with two nerdy sidekicks, in his case a sex-crazed film geek (Chris Marquette) and a pasty-faced, long-haired nebbish (Paul Dano). In a scenario ripped off partly from ''Risky Business'' and partly from ''Something Wild,'' Matt finds himself mixed up with the title character, Danielle (Elisha Cuthbert), who has left the adult entertainment industry to seek a little peace and quiet in his tranquil neighborhood.
A feeble roller coaster of a plot ensues, in which Matt falls in love with Danielle, discovers her former profession, alienates her, tries to win her back and heads to Las Vegas with his pals to rescue her -- all before he must deliver a climactic speech on moral fiber to win a scholarship to Georgetown. Through it all, ''The Girl Next Door'' tries to balance prurience with sweetness, to acknowledge the appeal and popularity of pornography without fully embracing it. Like pornography itself (one imagines), this requires both stamina and dexterity, qualities the director, Luke Greenfield, notably lacks. Working from an overprocessed, nearly jokeless script by Stuart Blumberg, David T. Wagner and Brent Goldberg, he races through the swerves of the plot as if in a hurry to get it all over with.
The central couple is likable enough, and Ms. Cuthbert, though not as pneumatically endowed as you might expect for a woman in Danielle's line of work, is both sexy and engaging. At first, Danielle entices Matt to shake off his inhibitions (and tricks him into taking off his clothes). Eventually, though, she settles into bland vulnerability, and Mr. Hirsch, who looks more like Leonardo DiCaprio the more disheveled and panicky his character becomes, never really picks up the comic slack. That task falls to Timothy Olyphant, who plays Kelly, Danielle's erstwhile producer and Matt's mentor in lizardy hipsterism. Kelly somewhat resembles the Ray Liotta character in ''Something Wild,'' jumping from charm to menace with sociopathic syncopation, but Mr. Olyphant plays him with a throwaway inventiveness worthy of Johnny Depp. Kelly is a thoroughgoing creep, but he's also the classiest thing in the movie.
The rest of it alternates between slobbery adolescent male fantasy and prim Hollywood moralizing, with valuable lessons trotted out in skimpy lingerie. ''The Girl Next Door' offers a view of pornography that is nonjudgmental, even celebratory, but at the same time its premise -- that Danielle must be rescued from the shame and degradation of her old job -- suggests a more traditional, disapproving point of view. Instead of addressing this contradiction, the movie is happy to wallow in it, which would be fine if it had any real pleasure to offer. When Danielle first robs Matt of his clothes, he protests that it's not funny. ''It's a little bit funny,'' she insists, with her winningly crooked smile. ''The Girl Next Door'' doesn't even make it that far.
''The Girl Next Door''
~
As its title suggests, ''Johnson Family Vacation,'' which opens nationwide today, could be described as a family road-trip comedy in the weary tradition of the National Lampoon Vacation movies starring Chevy Chase. Unfortunately, this rendition, with the redoubtable Cedric the Entertainer in the put-upon patriarch role, feels more like a grueling road trip in search of a family comedy. Once the destination, a reunion in a small Missouri town, is finally reached, the movie loosens up a little, but not enough to make the cramped, bumpy ride worth it. ''When are we going to be there?'' you want to cry out, ''there'' meaning either a worthwhile joke or, failing that, the end credits.
This is a shame since Cedric, as fans of the ''Barbershop'' movies and connoisseurs of Bud Lite (or at least Bud Lite commercials) well know, can be a mischievous and engaging comic performer. For most of ''Johnson Family Vacation,'' though, he languishes in the role of straight man, speaking in his exaggerated uptight-professional voice and feigning exasperation at the doings of his rather generic onscreen family.
Cedric plays Nate Johnson, an insurance executive who sets off for his ancestral home in a maroon Lincoln Navigator that has been equipped with 26-inch rims, hydraulic suspension and other ''thugged out'' features because of a misunderstanding at the customizing shop. Accompanying him are his three children and his wife (Vanessa Williams), from whom he has been separated for a few months. He must also contend with his adolescent son, D. J. (Bow Wow), whose love of hip-hop offends Nate's old-school sensibilities; with his headstrong teenage daughter, Nikki (Solange Knowles); and with the imaginary dog of his younger daughter, Destiny.
All of this would be just fine if the script had any freshness or sparkle, or if the director, Christopher Erskin, knew how to package the recycled jokes. En route to the reunion, various obstacles present themselves -- a menacing 18-wheeler, a Devil-worshiping hitchhiker (Shannon Elizabeth), a hot tub full of fat women -- none terribly inspired, and all funnier in concept than in execution. These mishaps turn the whole Johnson clan into a family of straight men, which makes for a boring trip indeed.
A measure of relief comes when they reach Missouri, where Cedric reappears in the person of Uncle Earl, a kind of country cousin to the rambling old-timer he plays in the ''Barbershop'' pictures. Earl, who takes the battered Navigator to his down-home auto repair shop, brings a jolt of anarchic clowning to the movie, as does Steve Harvey, who plays Nate's supercompetitive older brother. The various issues that have bedeviled the Johnsons are resolved, and they rather abruptly head back home to Los Angeles, making you wonder why they ever undertook this journey in the first place.
''Johnson Family Vacation'' 
~
Directed by Kevin Bray
PG-13, 86 minutes
The latest messiah of the multiplex is Chris Vaughn, the character played by the former professional wrestler the Rock in ''Walking Tall,'' which opens today nationwide. Crisply directed by Kevin Bray, this film is a remake of the Nixon-era law-and-order hit of the same title, which was set in a Tennessee town taken over by vice peddlers, and starred Joe Don Baker as Sheriff Buford Pusser, a no-nonsense guy who cleaned up the streets with the help of a huge wooden club.
In the new film, the action has been transposed to Washington State (probably to allow the producers to shoot in the budget-friendly confines of British Columbia), and the Southern sheriff has become a Special Forces veteran who returns to find his hometown, once a cozy logging community nestled in a mountain valley, turned into a hellish den of iniquity. Mothers abandon their squealing babies in their strollers while they duck into alleys to score methamphetamines; high school kids openly smoke marijuana; and the Main Street hardware store has been replaced by a Home Depot out by the highway. Mill workers, once dignified, are reduced to employment as bouncers in the town's only remaining business, the casino owned by Chris's childhood friend Jay Hamilton (a nicely menacing turn by Neal McDonough).
The big stick is back, too, and gets plenty of play once the fed-up townspeople elect Chris as their new, reform sheriff. Chris enlists his best buddy from high school (Johnny Knoxville), a reformed drug addict, to serve as his deputy, rescues his own childhood sweetheart (Kristen Wilson) from her career as a pole dancer at the casino and takes on his former friend's well-armed henchmen in what quickly becomes an apocalyptic battle of Good versus Evil.
With a brisk running time of 86 minutes, ''Walking Tall'' has no more fat on it than the Rock himself, a hulking yet curiously ingratiating presence who seems the most likely candidate to replace Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger as America's favorite living comic book character. For all of his bulk, the Rock has a mildness of speech and a modesty of bearing that immediately give him a human dimension, something Mr. Schwarzenegger did not achieve until well into his career. Unlike so many of our recent action heroes, the Rock seems to be less about anger and revenge than about justice and self-discipline, a nuance that is also a saving grace.
''Walking Tall'' has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) for scenes of violence, mild sexuality and firmly condemned drug use.   DAVE KEHR

~
The feature-length Disney western cartoon comedy ''Home on the Range'' is seldom funny. At the very least, the movie may be the first film to require cortisone treatments from jamming its elbow in the audience's ribs so often. Stampeding into view with a corny, jokey theme song, ''Range'' is intent on making ''Blazing Saddles'' look like ''The Three Sisters.''
It doesn't help that the project, directed by John Sanford and Will Finn (who worked on the equally ill-at-ease, but less funny ''Road to El Dorado'') is so parodistic that it nearly disappears off the screen before your eyes. The watercolor vistas -- the movie's way of conveying sun-drenched panoramas and rock formations -- don't pop with the vividness of computer animation.
Roseanne Barr is the voice of Maggie, a show cow and three-time winner of the Golden Udder award who's now homeless; Ms. Barr's spiky, slightly sour delivery gives ''Range'' some needed breathing room. Maggie's owner was bankrupted and forced to sell his farm after the rustler Alameda Slim (Randy Quaid) cleaned him out of cow and home.
Maggie is deposited at Patch of Heaven, a dairy farm, where she meets up with two other heifers: the prim Brit Mrs. Caloway (Judi Dench) and Grace (Jennifer Tilly), a hippie moo-train who preaches conflict avoidance.
When Patch of Heaven, also on the verge of failure, is about to be put on the auction block, Maggie leads her new friends to capture Slim. The bounty on his head is just enough to save the farm from extinction.
The characters found on the ''Range,'' which opens nationwide today, are enveloped in more neuroses than you'd find in an entire night of stand-up specials on Comedy Central.
The girls' competition for snaring Slim is Buck (Cuba Gooding Jr.), a hyperactive stallion whose battle dreams seem to have been choreographed by the martial-arts master Yuen Wo-Ping. When he's finally pressed into crime-fighting service, as the mount of the taciturn and heroic bounty hunter Rico (Charles Dennis), Buck can hardly contain himself. And Slim was driven into a life of crime by a persecution complex that calls for the cool touch of Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman.
''Range'' features the return of the composer Alan Menken to the animation corral, and the song score has efforts by Bonnie Raitt, Tim McGraw and, in a welcome homecoming to country-western influenced music, K. D. Lang.
The movie is constantly bouncing ideas off conventions, like saving a ranch from foreclosure. The cheeky influence of ''The Simpsons'' can be felt here. Everything in the movie, like the restless pile-up of jokes -- several of which are funny -- seems to be trying too hard.
The laughs from the audience come at widely spaced intervals, since everyone is reacting to something entirely different, making ''Range'' seem to exist in several time zones simultaneously. To be sure, unrestrained energy is hardly a bad thing for animation -- the best cartoons are built on the contradictory pursuit of meticulously arranged anarchy. But they never seem needy, or desperate for laughs, as ''Home on the Range'' does. The film seems hungrier for a pat on the head than a chuckle.
''Home on the Range'' 
~
Directed by Raja Gosnell
PG, 91 minutes
Packed with extensive and expensive digital effects, ''Scooby-Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed'' appears to represent Warner Brothers' effort to produce a homegrown rival to its wildly successful, feverishly Anglophilic ''Harry Potter'' franchise. Adapted (like the first film, released in 2002) from a short-lived (1969 to 1972) Saturday morning cartoon series produced by the Hanna-Barbera factory, ''Scooby-Doo 2'' features a gang of all-American teenagers (played by actors well into their 20's) whose mascot is the semitalking, computer-generated dog Scooby. Their mission: to battle the seemingly supernatural apparitions that constantly beset the back-lot town of Coolsville.
Where ''Harry Potter'' offended some conservative Christians with its apparent endorsement of witchcraft and sorcery, ''Scooby-Doo'' threatens to do the same by steadfastly denying the existence of any transcendent dimension. In the strictly secular-humanist world of ''Scooby-Doo,'' there are no real ghosts, but only humans desperate for attention who disguise themselves as supernatural figures. The episodes end with a ritual unmasking, in which a feared apparition -- like the Pterodactyl Ghost, the Black Knight Ghost, Captain Cutler's Ghost and the 10,000-Volt Ghost -- is revealed as a mewling fraud.
All of the above pseudospirits are back for ''Scooby-Doo 2,'' which begins with a tribute to the ghost-busting gang -- handsome Fred (Freddie Prinze Jr.), perky Daphne (Sarah Michelle Gellar), brainy Velma (Linda Cardellini) and spacey Shaggy (Matthew Lillard) -- at the Coolsonian Criminology Museum. On display are the ghost costumes captured from various miscreants, which suddenly come to life on the orders of a mysterious masked figure who appears in the exhibition hall and seriously poops the party. It's time for our friends, who call themselves Mystery Inc., to strike back and reclaim their damaged reputations.
Who is the mysterious masked figure? Among the suspects are the guest stars Seth Green, Peter Boyle, Tim Blake Nelson and Alicia Silverstone, all of whom seem to have signed up for a maximum of two days' work.
''Scooby-Doo 2,'' which opens today nationwide, is, like its predecessor, directed by Raja Gosnell, a protégé of and former film editor for Chris Columbus, who made the first two ''Harry Potter'' films. Mr. Gosnell does his best to recreate the Potter blend of mild spookiness and kiddie comedy, but the material just is not as psychologically rich as J. K. Rowling's shrewd combination of adolescent self-pity and violent revenge fantasy.
''Scooby-Doo 2'' looks like a Saturday morning cartoon (the characters all wear color-coded costumes) and unfortunately feels like one, too, with its thin characterizations, largely arbitrary action and feeble jokes. (A few flatulence gags, probably too tasteless for television, have been added to the theatrical version.) Kids will find ''Scooby-Doo 2'' a place holder at best, a way of staving off impatience while waiting for ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban,'' to be released on June 4.
''Scooby-Doo 2'' 
~
''Taking Lives,'' which opens today nationwide, is a movie about an F.B.I. profiler pursuing a serial killer, a genre governed by a few unbreakable rules. It comes as no surprise that the killer, who not only smashes his victims' faces and cuts off their hands but also assumes their names and identities, calls up the profiler at an inopportune moment to tell her, ''We're the same.''
True enough: these days, such movies are pretty much all the same. One imagines that the people who make them -- this one was directed by D. J. Caruso (''The Salton Sea'') from a script by Jon Bokenkamp -- approach their work with the same weary, anxious professionalism that drives the heroes and heroines. How to refresh a premise that has been so stale for so long? How to manufacture a surprise twist for an audience increasingly adept at sniffing out prepackaged surprises? Why even bother?
From a technical standpoint, ''Taking Lives'' is competent and sometimes even impressive. It is cleanly edited and nicely shot -- at times as cool and rich as a York Peppermint Pattie. Beyond that, there is not much to say. Those smashed-up corpses -- they sure are gruesome. That Angelina Jolie -- she sure has some pair of lips. That Kiefer Sutherland -- he sure can be creepy. That Ethan Hawke -- he sure is in this movie.
In one respect, though, ''Taking Lives,'' based on a novel by Michael Pye, shines with rare integrity and originality: it is a movie shot in Canada that is actually set there, rather than pretending to take place in New York or Chicago. Quibblers might point out that much of what is supposed to be Montreal is actually Quebec City, but since I am fond of both cities, I won't complain. The French Canadian setting also allows for the casting of three fine French actors -- Tchéky Karyo, Jean-Hugues Anglade and Olivier Martinez (Diane Lane's lover in ''Unfaithful'') -- who add a brooding, Gallic flavor to the proceedings. Mr. Martinez is volatile and unshaven, Mr. Karyo suave and trenchcoated, Mr. Anglade unshaven and trenchcoated. From time to time, they even speak French.
Otherwise, things unfold in the usual hyped-up, improbable fashion. Ms. Jolie, the flesh-and-blood actress most likely to be mistaken for a computer-generated special effect, plays Illeana Scott, an F.B.I. agent dispatched to Montreal to help the moody, territorial, French-speaking cops catch the killer. Her quarry turns out to be a mysterious, shape-shifting fellow who began his killing spree on a country road 20 years earlier and has burrowed like a hermit crab into the biographies of the men he has slaughtered since then. An art dealer named James Costa (Mr. Hawke) has witnessed one of the killings and may be the next target. Something about him ruffles Ileana's steely demeanor, and they edge toward a dangerous love affair. Meanwhile, the murderer's mother (Gena Rowlands) shows up, convinced she has seen her long-lost son. (Could it be Mr. Sutherland?) She lives in a lonely old house whose basement Illeana decides to explore without backup.
Why would she do a thing like that? You might as well ask why she lounges in the bathtub gazing at pictures of battered corpses, or why she and James consummate their dangerous love affair standing up against a wobbly table when there is a perfectly nice hotel bed a few feet away, or why the ludicrous ending must take place in a lonely farmhouse in the middle of nowhere. Because it's that kind of a movie, and rules are rules.
''Taking Lives'' 
~
The original 1978 horror splatter-comedy ''Dawn of the Dead'' had an idea that played like cast-iron satire: zombies invading a mall. The one good exchange from that film is repeated in Zack Snyder's single-minded scare-tactic remake: when someone asks why the zombies congregate there, the response is: ''Memory, maybe. Instinct.''
Otherwise, Mr. Snyder's blood feast is strictly by the numbers: this second-rater could be the world's most expensive Troma film. That makes sense: the screenwriter for the remake, James Gunn, also banged out ''Tromeo and Juliet'' (1996), that no-budget B-movie-studio's seminal film (that is, if the word seminal can be appended to Troma). Still, this is the first studio picture to exhibit the tacky Troma influence, which means ---- something, like the end of shame in Western civilization, perhaps. However, since ''Dawn of the Dead,'' which opens today nationwide, doubtless thinks of itself as a reimagining rather than a remake, the concept of shame was probably obliterated the moment the script got a green light from Universal.
''The Dead'' -- with apologies to James Joyce -- notches its frights early, before the introduction of the, excuse the euphemism, characters. The first undead we see is a little girl with part of her face rotted away, who goes right for her dad's neck. The mother, Ana (Sarah Polley), barely escapes the house intact and drives away through an apocalyptic version of the dozy suburban tract neighborhood she had come home to the night before. The graphic point of zombielike conformity was made earlier with an overhead shot of the neighborhood.
In such instances, ''Dead'' establishes its scariness with an efficiently tactless facelessness -- that is, if the use of the word faceless doesn't provoke a defamation of character suit from the zombie lobby, apparently based in Toronto. That's where this movie was obviously shot, despite shabby attempts to convince audiences that it is set in Milwaukee.
Milwaukee, the home of the bubbler, is transformed into the subdivision of the living dead. Ana runs into Kenneth (Ving Rhames), a uniformed cop, who makes her speak. It's one of the few ways to tell the zombies from the living -- though with dialogue like this, who's better off? They're joined by Michael (Jake Weber), Andre (Mekhi Phifer) and his very pregnant wife, Luda (Inna Korobkina). They make their way to the Crossroad Mall, where a handful of security guards led by the suspicious C. J. (Michael Kelly) have taken up residence.
C. J.'s intolerance is evident early, when he calls Andre ''Shaq.'' His ragtag minimum-wage squad is determined to keep the zombies out, especially once Ana figures out that the life-free scourge is spread from a zombie bite. Isn't it always funny that people in zombie movies have never seen zombie movies, so they have no information whatsoever?
''Dead'' does an adequate job of building up the tension early, but the traces of humor with which the original writer-director, George A. Romero, slathered the first version weren't nearly as ham-fisted as those found in the current one. The reimaginers of ''Dead'' have to cope with being compared with a classic, while Mr. Romero had to deal with a much more horrendous thought: making a sequel to a legitimate classic, 1968's spartan and terrifying ''Night of the Living Dead.'' (Mr. Romero's genius came from never explaining why the zombie infection plagued Pittsburgh, a plot device this new version keeps.)
There are a few other nods to the initial ''Dawn of the Dead,'' like a cameo appearance by the gore makeup genius Tom Savini, who worked on the earlier film. And the opening and closing credits by Prologue Film are so good they're almost worth sitting through the film for.
Such treats aside, we're left with a movie dependent on generating its small amount of sparks by setting an order in which to eliminate the annoying cast members. A scene in which weapons have to be liberated from a gun store so the group can carry out a plan to get to a marina and sail away to safety -- don't ask -- shows why zombie pictures aren't unsettling anymore. The flesh-eaters are picked off like video-game targets.
The eventual video game is bound to be a lot more fun -- and less slowed down by bad dialogue -- than this ''Dead.''
''Dawn of the Dead'' 
~
The director John Crowley uses the warm rapport of ensemble acting to take the jaggedness out of the rough-and-tumble vivacity of digital-video moviemaking. A result is the dry-roasted and altogether compelling Irish comedy-drama ''Intermission.''
The opening scene announces the film's intentions and is emblematic of its approach. Strolling into a restaurant and trilling his consonants as if he were trying to add an extra layer of moss to his accent, the roguish Lehiff (Colin Farrell) wins over the girl behind the counter, and the scene spins wildly into something else entirely. The shock -- both comic and finally horrific -- gives the movie the fizz of unpredictability (and in a wonderful gesture and nod to both ''The Third Man'' and ''Don't Look Now,'' a child's blithe behavior adds a grim kick). Surprise hovers over ''Intermission'' like a creature waiting to stun the cast of the movie into submission.
What Mr. Crowley and the screenwriter Mark O'Rowe have done, though, is assemble a group of actors whose feistiness prevents the doom that drips around the corners of the frame from consuming them all whole. The tangle of intersecting lives is what keeps the movie thorny and forces the actors to stay alert.
Though a bank robbery is fundamentally the center of the action, following the characters around is really what ''Intermission'' is all about. It's as if the movie serves as an intermission for Mr. Crowley from the rigid demands of plot and theme that crop up so often in his stage work. (Mr. O'Rowe, the scenarist, is also a playwright.)
''Intermission,'' which opens today in New York, Los Angeles and Boston, is a relief of sorts for many of the actors, too. Colm Meaney almost never gets the opportunity to show the depth of his skill in American movies; his broad face and ever-ready small smile seems to rob directors in the United States of their imagination. Mr. Meaney plows through this movie as Jerry, a smirking, vile -- and violent -- cop who loves embellishing his own cheap mythology while crooning along to Celtic songs and torturing any miscreant unfortunate enough to step into his path. And especially if that path happens to be filmed by a reality-show producer -- acting as his martial peripheral vision -- pursuing him.
Another among the mélange of characters, the sniping, griping Sally (Shirley Henderson), is both angry and overly sensitive about her face. And her crankiness is made worse by a sister, Deirdre (Kelly Macdonald), so beautiful she could have stepped out of a Danny Boyle movie. The sad-eyed supermarket clerk John (Cillian Murphy) is still mooning over Deirdre; she left him to get involved with a yuppie cartoon of a bank manager. This is what motivates him to join Lehiff in the robbery -- which Jerry is trying to solve.
The seamy side of Dublin on view in ''Intermission'' is also inhabited by John's oily and lazy opportunist pal, Oscar (David Wilmot), who cruises bars for middle-aged women to seduce. The needy Oscar grits his teeth as a parade of the 80's greatest hits pounds the crowds on the dance floor.
The director and screenwriter treat ''Intermission'' as a physics problem: how can this unwieldy mass of comedy, violence, cheap sex and self-pity be kept in orbit, even though its volume threatens to bring it back down to earth in a flaming heap in every single scene? The jaunty and shameless surges of comedy from Mr. O'Rowe prodded by Mr. Crowley -- often cruel and angry -- as well as the sheer cantankerousness of the actors provides a force that keeps this lively knockabout project from surrendering to the gravitational pull trying to snatch it down.
''Intermission'' eventually does slam into the ground -- nothing with this many different environments could stay in the lower stratosphere for so long. But even the climactic explosion of ''Intermission'' becomes part of the whole -- the crashing and burning were anticipated and provide a lovely, toasty light.
''Intermission'' 
~
It seems unlikely that David Mamet, one of the most admired American playwrights of the past 30 years, will ever become a great filmmaker. But that may not be his ambition. On the evidence of his last few pictures -- the show-business satire ''State and Main,'' the bluntly titled ''Heist'' and now ''Spartan,'' which opens today nationwide -- Mr. Mamet appears to be more interested in professional mastery than in the production of masterpieces. For most of its running time ''Spartan,'' a political thriller with the lonely, aching, slightly musty soul of a film noir, is a vigorous and engrossing genre exercise that manages the difficult trick of being both logically meticulous and genuinely surprising. Its elaborately implausible story gestures now and then toward an idea, but the movie's main concern is technique.
Which is not such a bad thing. Given the current state of Hollywood thriller-making, which manufactures ''surprise twists'' by the gross and slaps them like garish party hats onto lackluster stories, the pleasures of ''Spartan'' should not be undervalued. The first two-thirds of the film, in which Val Kilmer hurtles down the dark corridors of a cleverly designed narrative labyrinth, should be assigned in film-school classes, if only to provide today's hyperactive young sensation-mongers with a lesson or two in economy, clarity and the virtues of indirection.
It hardly seems accidental that professionalism has long been one of Mr. Mamet's favorite subjects. Whatever else it may be, ''Spartan,'' like ''Heist'' or ''Lakeboat'' or ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' is an examination of work, of what people (mostly men) do and how they talk when they're on the job. The job in this case is the kind that might be listed in the classifieds under ''Action Hero.'' Robert Scott (Mr. Kilmer) is first seen training recruits in whatever top-secret, ultralethal government agency it is he works for.
The tender, antagonistic bond between mentor and protégé -- the psychologically tense and physically dangerous process by which amateurs turn pro -- is an endlessly fascinating theme for Mr. Mamet. ''Spartan'' is constructed around two such relationships between Scott and younger agents: Curtis, played by Derek Luke (''Antwone Fisher''), and Jackie, played by Tia Texada. ''Man to man, can you get me on that plane?'' Jackie asks Scott at one point, a request conveyed and received without so much as a raised eyebrow.
What a man's got to do -- even if the man happens to be a woman -- is rescue a girl. Late one night, Scott is summoned to Cambridge, Mass. The president's daughter, Laura Newton (Kristen Bell), a Harvard student, has been kidnapped, apparently by an international sex-slave ring that preys on young blond women. Laura, a nationally adored redhead, had recently dyed her hair, which may make ''Spartan'' something of a cautionary tale. (That her captors are ruthless Arabs also makes it either defiantly politically incorrect or hysterically racist -- or would, if it were not also so grimly silly.) Was her abduction a simple case of mistaken identity or the result of a complex political conspiracy? Or did it not happen at all?
As is so often the case with movies of this kind, those questions are much more intriguing than the answers, and in its last 40 minutes ''Spartan'' starts to seem as battered and fatigued as its hero. The ending, which is meant to bring us face to face with the evil of unscrupulous politicians and the rottenness of power, is ponderous rather than shocking. But this disappointment is mitigated, along the way, by Juan Ruiz-Anchia's glowing blue-gray cinematography and by innumerable little touches of Mametude.
The dialogue, a barrage of on-the-job boilerplate hissed and barked into cellphones and wrist radios, bristles with carefully diagrammed wisecracks and spiky tough-guy koans. William H. Macy, a native speaker of Mametese, strides through a few scenes in near silence, but his presence certifies the movie as authentic Mamet product.
And Mr. Kilmer's cool, watchful inscrutability turns out to be well suited to Mr. Mamet's approach to language and acting. The stylized Mamet language is not meant to express a character's thoughts or emotions, but to deflect attention from them. Mr. Kilmer speaks his jargon with the expected precision, but his face tells another story.
Like many other inhabitants of Mr. Mamet's universe -- the con man in ''House of Games,'' the salesmen in ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' the thieves in ''Heist'' -- Scott is something of an actor, quickly assuming new identities and states of feeling when the job requires it and sloughing them off when they no longer serve an immediate practical purpose. The theatricality of his work is captured in a brilliant set piece, during which Scott's impersonation of a solitary armed robber is assisted by a silent backstage crew wielding fake blood and cue cards.
Scott's crisis comes when the mask starts to slip, and when his own sense of right and wrong comes into conflict with his training. This is an old story and not, in this case, a terribly interesting one, since Mr. Mamet's appeals to deep feeling tend to be trite and clumsy. Mr. Kilmer, in contrast, never lets his concentration slip, and his performance remains subtle and graceful, even as ''Spartan'' becomes obvious and crude. He was clearly the right man for the job, even if the job description never made much sense.
''Spartan'' 
~
The writer and director Todd Phillips's big-screen adaptation of ''Starsky & Hutch'' has a crafty, can-you-dig-it? spirit, derived from his affection for the 1970's and the original television cop series. All that's missing from the flaky fun is an announcement over the film's end credits: ''Tonight, on 'The Love Boat' . . .''
The TV show featured a pair of apparently plainclothes fuzz -- who were they supposed to be fooling? -- played by Paul Michael Glaser and David Soul. When they weren't tumbling into each other's arms, they were sliding over the roofs of cars or over suspects' Miranda rights. Mr. Phillips may not quite be a filmmaker, but he's on his way to becoming a director. His grasp of tone is a few steps ahead of his previous film, ''Old School.'' That movie had the staticky inconsistency of the AM radio probably found in the dash of the '74 Gran Torino driven by the detectives David Starsky (Ben Stiller) and Ken Hutchinson (Owen Wilson), better known as Hutch.
The fishtailing oversteer of that eight-cylinder beast is almost another character in a plot fueled by leaded gas. It involves the detectives in hot pursuit of a drug ring, as both the car and the story career through the streets of a backdrop so anonymous that it might as well be called Santa Metro. (The actual name is Bay City.)
Starsky is probably one of those rare detectives who don't deserve the by-the-book speeches from their commanders, in this case Captain Doby (Fred Williamson, looking fit enough to keep up with his squad). Starsky is paired with another loner -- cool, shaggy Hutch -- who's a step away from being bounced from the force for dancing around sticky procedural guidelines involving payoffs and consorting with criminals.
Starsky and Hutch are tethered to a harness of buddy-movie clichés, but their congeniality comes from the actors' chemistry, demonstrated in several previous films together. As Starsky, Mr. Stiller uses the caffe Americano bravado that made his sketch turns on ''The Ben Stiller Show'' so freakishly intense. He's doing an inside-out re-creation of Mr. Glaser's puffed-chest brawler, and he has been tricked out in nearly every outfit that Starsky wore through the series's run, down to the creased jeans and blue-and-white Adidas found in contemporary photo spreads in magazines like The Fader.
Mr. Wilson is just as competitive an actor as Mr. Stiller, but sails through the movie with his toasted graciousness, which is equal parts Jeff Spicoli of ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High'' and the television private eye Jim Rockford. (Like Rockford, Hutch even lives in a trailer.) Mr. Wilson has really become the stoner's version of James Garner, and his most charming asset continues to be his combination of good manners and ecstasy-flavored narcissism. While he seems to be squinting to get a fix on his conversational partner, he's actually trying to get a better look at his reflection in that person's eyes.
Avoiding the confrontational machismo that made the series a regular target in the pages of The Advocate, the movie instead plays Starsky's zealous obliviousness against Hutch's low-rent worldliness. This pays off in moments like a double-date scene that's part interrogation and part Russ Meyer, which gives Mr. Wilson a chance to recreate a David Soul moment pitched, evidently, in the key of L.
Mr. Phillips throws in cameos, both expected and wickedly surprising, that keep things hopping. Based on the number of faithfully recreated moments in the ''Starsky & Hutch'' movie, he must know that the show -- with its casual brutality and sardonic, back-alley fascism -- was derived from slap-happy action comedy-dramas like Richard Rush's 1974 ''Freebie and the Bean'' and, more specifically, Peter Hyams's 1974 ''Busting.''
Mr. Hyams's picture was so much the blueprint for the producer Aaron Spelling's television construction that several ''Busting'' sequences made it into the ''Starsky & Hutch'' pilot. The varsity jacket that Elliott Gould's vice cop wore in ''Busting'' became part of Hutch's wardrobe. (Mr. Wilson also sports one in the film when he's not parading in a collection of vintage leather jackets that will break the hearts of thrift-store buccaneers.)
Mr. Phillips and his team upholster the film, which opens today nationwide, with a luscious 70's vibe. The sets luxuriate in the production designer Edward Verreaux's period credibility; Theodore Shapiro mines musical gold more thoughtful than mere pastiche. And the costume designer Louise Mingenbach earns the attention lavished on her handiwork: one of the villains wears a retro robin's-egg-blue suit that's simply too cool for words. As boldly captured by the cinematographer Barry Peterson, the atmosphere is what the Cure's Robert Smith might describe as ''lime green, a sickly kind of orange.''
Certainly, the crime lord Reese Feldman (Vince Vaughn, wearing a sprawling mustache suggesting a chocolate-milk smear on John Holmes's face) has the best-laid plans this side of America. He's invented a type of cocaine that can't be detected by normal means. Though he seems to have absorbed Bill Murray's offhanded brutishness whole, Mr. Vaughn's brash brattiness should be enshrined: an Ugly American statue on display at the Burbank Museum of Modern Art.
But the movie's advertising tagline (''Starsky & Hutch -- they're the Man'') needs to be amended. The film belongs, completely and utterly, to Snoop Dogg.
Picking up the mantle of the police informant Huggy Bear, Snoop Dogg wears audience rapport as if it were a new fragrance. He plays the movie like a B side, and the stars have smarts enough to get out of his way. He's the man; everyone else is just standing in his shadow.
''Starsky & Hutch'' 
~
''Mister, you say anything you want about me,'' says the likable Frank Hopkins (Viggo Mortensen), just before punching a snobby Englishman, Preston Webb (C. Thomas Howell), whose accent is so bad you initially think he's being belted because no one believes him.
Webb's big mistake is to have insulted the real star of ''Hidalgo,'' a handsome mustang with a white face and brown patches over each eye, who gets more glamorous close-ups than Joan Crawford did in her entire career. (The horse has a much better hair stylist, too.)
The much too long, primitively plotted family action adventure ''Hidalgo,'' directed by Joe Johnston, has a handful of well-handled sequences but, given the young audience the film is intended for, the picture may be like having to finish an entire pot of broccoli to get a couple of jelly beans for dessert. ''Hidalgo'' may yet be declared cruel and unusual punishment for kids of all ages.
The expansive and unbelievable movie follows Frank, who's persuaded to leave safety-defying re-creations of Native American battles at the late-19th-century Wild West show of Buffalo Bill (J. K. Simmons) to participate in the Ocean of Fire, a death-defying trans-Arabian race across 3,000 miles of desert. The prize is $100,000, and the competition is ''100 of the finest horses,'' probably bred to withstand the climate.
Eventually the journey of Frank and Hidalgo becomes a testament to Frank's need for validation, and it is so full of incident that the movie is finally about as colorful and convincing as one of those penny dreadfuls about Buffalo Bill's own life. There aren't many films that include the Wounded Knee massacre, a shot of the Statue of Liberty, a computer-generated sandstorm left over from ''The Scorpion King,'' megasize locusts and a grand and incredibly staged rescue from a kidnapping, which logistically and storywise is the film's high point.
''Hidalgo,'' which opens nationwide today, is one of the few movies that seem to be making up their plots as they go along; actually I thought Hidalgo was making up the story as he went along. The film glorifies the horse's questionable exploits and endurance: he's certainly smart enough to have typed it, not to mention shrewd enough to keep quiet. Holding up his long head for dignified close-ups and flaring his nostrils for the occasional nose-bleed, the mustang brings to mind a combination of ''Camille'' and ''National Velvet.''
Mr. Mortensen, who is photographed just as well as the equine star, doesn't get to be nearly as expressive -- or capable -- as the horse and his stand-ins. He has to spout lines in a delivery that's simultaneously rigid and informal, and, as in the ''Lord of the Rings'' films, the male with longer hair is treated with far more dignity than his counterparts. To make up for that, Mr. Mortensen's ready-for-my-close-up cheekbones are lighted by the talented cinematographer Shelly Johnson as if they were paintings added to the Smithsonian by Frederic Remington.
Frank and Hidalgo have to endure insults from the Bedouins as well as that Englishman, though Sheikh Riyadh (Omar Sharif, whose entrance music is right out of ''Lawrence of Arabia'') and Jazira (Zuleikha Robinson), his feisty, clear-eyed daughter with a mane as shiny as Hidalgo's, both come to respect them. Frank and Hidalgo don't get the same consideration from several others determined to do them in, like the riding competitor Prince Bin Al Reeh (Said Taghmaoui), Riyadh's dismissive aide Aziz (Adam Alexi-Malle), the vicious Katib (Silas Carson) and the devious Lady Davenport (Louise Lombard). (Even Hidalgo knows by this point never to trust British accents.)
Though it's going to be a very long sit for the small fry, ''Hidalgo'' was obviously inspired by Carroll Ballard's landmark 1979 horse film, ''The Black Stallion.'' This movie also has the handsome, weathered look of ''Blueberry,'' the Western comics fantasy created by Moebius (the French illustrator Jean Giraud). And like that work, the film has the feel of an exotic locale that seems to have been invented by someone who knows it only from old movies.
Whenever Frank, Hidalgo and their competitors arrive at a rest stop, the rest of the cast is already decamped and waiting for them. The movie never gets around to explaining how so many people can outmaneuver the racers, though the gleam in Hidalgo's eye shows he knows a lot more than he's letting on. Either that, or he's waiting to get the lead in a ''Seabiscuit'' series.
''Hidalgo'' 
~
Every once in a while a movie comes through with a daring brand of emotional and filmmaking honesty that redefines the medium. ''Dirty Dancing: Havana Nights'' is not such a movie. This reimagining of the recklessly melodramatic 1987 original is packed with flashy, taffeta silliness and a desperation for a sweaty PG-13 sexiness so laughable that the cast deserves Oscar nominations for getting through the picture without cracking up. It's one of the rare films for which a blooper reel would be redundant.
The movie starts the goofiness with the legend ''based on true events,'' placing ''Nights'' in the pantheon of historically faithful films like ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre,'' ''Against the Ropes'' and ''Showgirls.''
Well, there are clearly some things that are true. Apparently there really is a Havana, and there actually was a year 1958, in which the film is set. A teenager, Katey Miller (Romola Garai) has just moved to Havana with her family; her father, Bert (John Slattery), has gone there to work for the Ford Motor Company.
A nervous, repressed bookworm, Katey wraps her arms around her torso and wears a black cardigan as she sits by the pool, making us wonder if she grew up to be the Diane Keaton character in ''Something's Gotta Give.'' We know she's smart because in the first 10 minutes Radcliffe comes up so often in conversation about her that it starts to sound like Ivy League product placement.
Enter the foxy, sultry Javier (Diego Luna), a busboy whom Katey accidentally disgraces when she knocks over his tray of drinks. When she rushes to pay for the beverages, he bats his lush eyelashes and hisses, ''I don't need your charity,'' biting off the syllables of the last word as if he were chomping off plugs of tobacco on the pitching mound. Of course, this unfortunate introduction leads them down the path of amor -- love.
Despite seeming like an episode of ''American Dreams'' written by Pepé Le Pew, ''Nights'' has a few things in its favor. Chief among these, um, assets is an initially welcome cameo, though just mentioning it probably gives it away. (Unfortunately, the appearance lingers too long, going from cameo to the guest star who wouldn't leave.) Some of the Puerto Rican locations are dead ringers for Havana, particularly one that looks remarkably like that majestic Havana resort, the Hotel Nacional; the production designer Hugo Luczyc-Wyhowski has no need to hang his head, nor does the cinematographer, Anthony Richmond, who glazes the images with a warm sunlight.
Oddly enough, Mr. Luna shouldn't be too embarrassed, either. He has a playful, nuzzling way with dialogue and gently nudges much -- though obviously not all -- of the campiness out of material like ''What does looking have to do with it? Just feel the music!'' Given that he's only recently fluent in English, he does as well as he can with lines that sound as if they were spoken by Dirk Diggler in the porno-movies-within-the-movie in ''Boogie Nights.''
Poor Ms. Garai doesn't do nearly as well. Her entire performance consists of her training her stunned lower jaw on everyone else in the movie. (She seems to be doing a Drew Barrymore impression.) Ms. Garai is forced to mature too quickly, making the transition from nerdy to physically confident faster than this movie goes from clichéd to absurd. And that's a difficult task in a film that features ''Cubans'' dirty dancing -- in broad daylight in a public square -- as if they were the original cast of Bob Fosse's ''Chicago.'' Even the little kids fling their hips around like extras in a Christina Aguilera video. It's no wonder Fidel Castro wanted Batista out of the country.
Fittingly, politics rears its ugly head. Javier's firebrand brother, Carlos (René Lavan), lays into him for not furthering the goals of the revolution, flaring his nostrils through lines like ''You pour money into the pockets of the gangsters who run this country?''
It's safe to say that Carlos doesn't take Javier seriously. Then again, ''Nights,'' which opens nationwide today, is a series of condescensions. Javier mocks the stiff Katey. Then he develops a semipolitical conscience in a postcoital moment, which, of course, is when it happens with most teenagers. Continuing the string of humiliations, Katey gives the cold shoulder to her little sister, Susie (the engaging Mika Boorem), when she gets Javier fired. But since Javier's dismissal gives Katey the idea to recruit him as her dance partner for a contest that could win him $5,000 and his family's ticket to the United States -- igniting the rickety plot -- it seems Katey owes Susie something. And Katey's mom (Sela Ward) is furious when she finds out her daughter has been spending time with Javier.
Amusingly, Katey's eyes nearly pop out of their sockets when she sees Javier rolling his hips at the hot-hot-hot nightclub La Rosa Negro, where walking across the room to the bar becomes an opening act. Only because she's the film's star does Javier abandon the phalanx of beautiful Latinas to join a girl who's culturally so white she's nearly translucent. All of this patronizing makes sense in a movie that turns the Cuban Revolution into a Carnival Cruise Lines dance number. It continues the tradition of ruining the country as a film backdrop, as found in ''Havana'' (1990) and ''Cuba'' (1979), where the unfortunate American movie characters have their love affairs ruined by that annoying sociopolitical turmoil.
Then again, ''Dirty Dancing: Havana Nights'' is a movie set in a mythological time-warp village with no poor people, where nobody smokes and all the music seems to have been produced by Dallas Austin for a Black Eyed Peas album. Evidently 1958 Havana is the land where tolerance and hip-hop were invented. Oh, and some peasants got together to samba around a young, hot couple as a regime that still raises questions was just getting started.
To quote Roger Debris from ''The Producers,'' ''It's just drenched with historical goodies like that.''
''Dirty Dancing: Havana Nights'' 
~
How many serial killer movies have there been in which a homicidal sicko confronts the detective who is pursuing him and hisses, ''You're just like me,'' or ''I'm just like you,'' or something similar? It's an honest question; I've long since lost count. Whatever number you arrive at, please add one more: Philip Kaufman's ''Twisted,'' which opens today nationwide.
As the title suggests, though, this variation on the weary theme of symbiosis between hunter and hunted comes with -- ready? -- a twist. If the end of that sentence surprised you, so will the end of this laborious and nonsensical psychological thriller, a mediocre piece of studio hackwork unredeemed by a first-rate director. In this case, Jessica Shepard (Ashley Judd), a San Francisco police officer newly promoted to homicide inspector, tracks a killer who may be more than just like her. The killer, whose victims are all men she has slept with, may actually be Jessica.
Either that, or someone is carefully setting things up to look that way. Someone, that is, besides the screenwriter, Sarah Thorp, who supplies an abundance of psychological back story to make Jessica both a plausible suspect and a sympathetic figure. When she was a child, her father, also a San Francisco cop, went on a rampage that ended when he killed his wife and himself, and Jessica spends a lot of time gazing at the old crime-scene photographs as she drinks red wine until she passes out. (When her cellphone awakens her the next morning, it is usually with the news that another bludgeoned body, with a cigarette burn on one hand, has been found.)
Jessica was raised by her father's old partner, John Mills (Samuel L. Jackson), who has risen to become the city's police commissioner and has been Jessica's professional mentor as well as her surrogate father. Even as the bodies of her casual sex partners begin to pile up, Mills quashes any talk of pulling his protégée from the case, her first homicide investigation.
As is customary in movies of this kind, Jessica is surrounded by protectors, friends and colleagues who take turns moonlighting as potential suspects. Their possible guilt is teasingly explored even as evidence of Jessica's own guilt becomes ever more compelling. There are the ex-boyfriend (Mark Pellegrino), a fellow officer still bitter over their breakup; the grizzled, enigmatic partner (Andy Garcia); the soft-spoken, skeptical shrink (David Strathairn).
Mr. Kaufman also serves up quite a few teasing, counterfeit scares and atmospheric red herrings, culminating in the final series of twists and countertwists in which the killer is revealed and given a chance to explain everything.
I suppose someone has to, though I'm not sure anyone can clear up the mystery of why Mr. Kaufman, who has made movies as various and interesting as ''The Right Stuff,'' ''The Unbearable Lightness of Being'' and ''Quills,'' took on the dreary labor of ''Twisted.'' The suggestion that the movie's title may refer to its main character as well as its plot might have generated a creepy, intimate picture of Jessica's precarious mental state, but Ms. Judd is not an actress well suited to such explorations.
When she tries to show torment, she manages only to look peeved and grouchy, and her natural perkiness makes it hard to believe that Jessica is a hard-drinking, reckless loner, much less an unhinged serial killer. Ms. Judd tries to show the disparate sides of the character's personality -- her sexual voracity, her steely professionalism, her vulnerability and confusion -- but what results is a performance as incoherent as the film itself.
With ''Twisted,'' Ms. Judd is trying both to extend her string of professional-woman-in-distress thrillers (''Kiss the Girls'' and ''High Crimes,'' which featured Jim Caviezel, the actor currently known as Jesus) and to complicate the formula by darkening her customarily cheery and capable screen persona. (Until she was sidelined by an injury last week, she was also starring on Broadway as Maggie in ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.'') She struggles to convince us that she might have a dark side, but she succeeds only in tying herself up in knots.
''Twisted'' 
~
There is a prophetic episode of ''The Simpsons'' in which the celebrity guest star Mel Gibson, directing and starring in a remake of ''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington,'' enlists the help of Homer Simpson, who represents the public taste (or lack of it). Homer persuades Mr. Gibson to change the picture's ending, replacing James Stewart's populist tirade with an action sequence, a barrage of righteous gunfire that leaves the halls of Congress strewn with corpses. The audience flees the theater in disgust. I thought of Homer more than once, with an involuntary irreverence conditioned by many years of devotion to ''The Simpsons,'' as Mr. Gibson presented his new movie, ''The Passion of the Christ,'' to carefully selected preview audiences across the land, making a few last-minute cuts, and then taking to the airwaves to promote and defend the film. It opens today nationwide.
Given the Crucifixion story, Mr. Gibson did not need to change the ending.
''The Passion of the Christ'' is so relentlessly focused on the savagery of Jesus' final hours that this film seems to arise less from love than from wrath, and to succeed more in assaulting the spirit than in uplifting it. Mr. Gibson has constructed an unnerving and painful spectacle that is also, in the end, a depressing one. It is disheartening to see a film made with evident and abundant religious conviction that is at the same time so utterly lacking in grace.
Mr. Gibson has departed radically from the tone and spirit of earlier American movies about Jesus, which have tended to be palatable (if often extremely long) Sunday school homilies designed to soothe the audience rather than to terrify or inflame it.
His version of the Gospels is harrowingly violent; the final hour of ''The Passion of the Christ'' essentially consists of a man being beaten, tortured and killed in graphic and lingering detail. Once he is taken into custody, Jesus (Jim Caviezel) is cuffed and kicked and then, much more systematically, flogged, first with stiff canes and then with leather whips tipped with sharp stones and glass shards. By the time the crown of thorns is pounded onto his head and the cross loaded onto his shoulders, he is all but unrecognizable, a mass of flayed and bloody flesh, barely able to stand, moaning and howling in pain.
The audience's desired response to this spectacle is not revulsion, but something like the cowering, quivering awe manifested by Mary (Maia Morgenstern), Mary Magdalen (Monica Bellucci) and a few sensitive Romans and Jerusalemites as they force themselves to watch. Disgust and awe are not, when you think about it, so far apart, and in Mr. Gibson's vision one is a route to the other.
By rubbing our faces in the grisly reality of Jesus' death and fixing our eyes on every welt and gash on his body, this film means to make literal an event that the Gospels often treat with circumspection and that tends to be thought about somewhat abstractly. Look, the movie seems to insist, when we say he died for our sins, this is what we mean.
A viewer, particularly one who accepts the theological import of the story, is thus caught in a sadomasochistic paradox, as are the disciples for whom Jesus, in a flashback that occurs toward the end, promises to lay down his life. The ordinary human response is to wish for the carnage to stop, an impulse that seems lacking in the dissolute Roman soldiers and the self-righteous Pharisees. (More about them shortly.) But without their fathomless cruelty, the story would not reach its necessary end. To halt the execution would thwart divine providence and refuse the gift of redemption.
Anyway, this is a film review, not Sunday school. The paradox of wishing something horrible to stop even as you want it to continue has as much to do with moviegoing as with theology. And Mr. Gibson, either guilelessly or ingeniously, has exploited the popular appetite for terror and gore for what he and his allies see as a higher end. The means, however, are no different from those used by virtuosos of shock cinema like Quentin Tarantino and Gaspar Noé, who subjected Ms. Bellucci to such grievous indignity in ''Irréversible.'' Mr. Gibson is temperamentally a more stolid, less formally adventurous filmmaker, but he is no less a connoisseur of violence, and it will be amusing to see some of the same scolds who condemned Mr. Tarantino's ''Kill Bill: Vol. 1'' sing the praises of ''The Passion of the Christ.''
Mr. Gibson, from the moment he began speaking publicly about this project, emphasized his desire to make his ''Passion'' as realistic as possible. To that end the dialogue is in Aramaic and a dialect of Latin, which takes some getting used to but which dispenses with the stilted, awkward diction that afflicts so many biblical epics. The absence of identifiable movie stars (with the exception of Ms. Bellucci, who comports herself with fitting modesty) also adds an element of verisimilitude. But the style and tone of ''The Passion'' are far from what is ordinarily meant by realism.
The first part, which takes place in the murk and gloom of night (shot by the superb cinematographer Caleb Deschanel), has the feel of a horror movie. As Jesus prays in the garden of Gethsemane, the camera tiptoes around him like a stalker, and John Debney's score is a high-toned creep show of menacing orchestral undertones and spine-jabbing choral effects. A slithery, effeminate Satan (played, the end credits reveal, by a woman named Rosalinda Celentano) slinks around like something in a Wes Craven nightmare, and Judas, reeling from his betrayal, is menaced by demon children with pointy teeth and milky eyes.
When daylight dawns, the mood shifts from horror-movie suspense to slasher-film dread. Throughout, Mr. Gibson lays on Mr. Debney's canned sublimity with the heaviest possible hand, and he indulges in equally unsubtle visual and aural effects. Judas's 30 pieces of silver fly through the air in slow motion, and the first nail enters Jesus' palm with a thwack that must have taken hours of digital tweaking to articulate. The thuddingly emphatic storytelling (along with the ancient languages) makes the acting almost beside the point, though it is hard not to be impressed by Mr. Caviezel's endurance.
The only psychological complexity in this tableau of goodness and villainy belongs to Pontius Pilate and his wife, Claudia, played by two very capable actors, Hristo Naumov Shopov and Claudia Gerini, who I hope will become more familiar to American audiences.
Is ''The Passion of the Christ'' anti-Semitic? I thought you'd never ask. To my eyes it did not seem to traffic explicitly or egregiously in the toxic iconography of historical Jew hatred, but more sensitive viewers may disagree. The Pharisees, in their tallit and beards, are certainly shown as a sinister and inhumane group, and the mob they command is full of howling, ugly rage. But this on-screen villainy does not seem to exceed what can be found in the source material.
Mr. Gibson a few weeks ago reportedly expunged an especially provocative line of dialogue that referred to the Jews: ''His blood be on us, and on our children.'' That line comes from the Book of Matthew, and it would take a revisionist to remove every trace of controversy and intolerance from a story that rests squarely on the theological boundary separating Christianity from Judaism.
That Mr. Gibson did not attempt to transcend these divisions may be regrettable, but to condemn ''The Passion of the Christ'' for its supposed bigotry is to miss its point and to misstate its problems. The troubling implications of the film do not arise primarily from its religious agenda: an extreme, traditionalist Roman Catholicism that has not prevented ''The Passion'' from resonating, oddly enough, with many evangelical Protestants.
What makes the movie so grim and ugly is Mr. Gibson's inability to think beyond the conventional logic of movie narrative. In most movies -- certainly in most movies directed by or starring Mr. Gibson -- violence against the innocent demands righteous vengeance in the third act, an expectation that Mr. Gibson in this case whips up and leaves unsatisfied.
On its own, apart from whatever beliefs a viewer might bring to it, ''The Passion of the Christ'' never provides a clear sense of what all of this bloodshed was for, an inconclusiveness that is Mr. Gibson's most serious artistic failure. The Gospels, at least in some interpretations, suggest that the story ends in forgiveness. But such an ending seems beyond Mr. Gibson's imaginative capacities. Perhaps he suspects that his public prefers terror, fury and gore. Maybe Homer Simpson was right after all.
''The Passion of the Christ'' 
~
Directed by Robert Ramirez
G, 73 minutes
If you are reading this review, you are probably not part of the intended audience for ''Clifford's Really Big Movie,'' an oppressively innocuous animated feature.
Spun off from the PBS television show, itself spun off from Norman Bridwell's beloved series of picture books about an enormous red dog, ''Clifford'' will provide preschoolers with comfort and amusement, though not rapture or enchantment.
''Will there be bad guys?'' a precocious toddler inquired at the screening I attended. His accompanying adult, a film critic, guessed that there would not be, and she was right. Of course, some of the characters -- canine, human and other -- do some unkind things, and there are a few moments of worry and discomfort. Otherwise, as one of the gently cozy songs on the soundtrack suggests, there would be no story.
The story takes Clifford and his regular-size canine pals, Cleo and T-Bone, away from the rustic calm of Birdwell Island, a pleasant, bone-shaped, Martha's Vineyard-like spot, on a journey across various unimaginatively animated American landscapes. Because of a misunderstanding on Clifford's part -- he thinks his huge appetite threatens his owners' financial well-being -- the three dogs join a traveling carnival. Their goal is to enter a contest that will guarantee Clifford a lifetime supply of his favorite doggy snacks.
His size and talent quickly transform the faltering show -- which includes a skateboarding hound, a tightrope-walking cow and a multitalented ferret named Shackelford -- into a crowd-pleasing sensation. Its success causes some further misunderstanding and jealousy, and Clifford is briefly kidnapped by a doggy-treat mogul (voice of John Goodman), but friendly good feelings are quickly restored. (And I do mean quickly; the movie lasts a scant 73 minutes.)
Young children will snuggle up in the movie's cozy good cheer. They will probably not mind the clumsy, gaudy animation, which lamely tries to bring more color and dimension to the simple, soothing style of the television series. Grown-ups, on the other hand, may discover that the movements of the rubbery characters against the flat backgrounds give them headaches.
They may also find that the atmosphere of benign tedium is tinged with a bit of sadness, since Clifford speaks in the voice of John Ritter, who died suddenly last year. For the youngest moviegoers and channel-surfers, Clifford will be an important part of his legacy, at least until they wander away from the child-friendly channels and happen upon a syndicated rerun of ''Three's Company.''
''Clifford's Really Big Movie'' opens today in New York, Atlanta, Minneapolis, Phoenix and Austin, Tex.   A. O. SCOTT

~
Directed by Donald Petrie
PG-13, 115 minutes
Donald Petrie's ''Welcome to Mooseport,'' from a screenplay by Tom Schulman and a story by Doug Richardson, is a terminally mild attempt to revive the populist political comedy pioneered by Frank Capra in the 1930's.
A small town in Maine (ably portrayed by Port Perry, a small town in Ontario), Mooseport is populated largely by lovable eccentrics, like the geriatric nude jogger who appears under the opening credits. Its leading citizen is Handy Harrison (Ray Romano), the owner of the Main Street hardware store and the community's general Mr. Fix-It: a not-so-distant cousin to the Longfellow Deeds (Gary Cooper) of Capra's ''Mr. Deeds Goes to Town'' (1936). Handy's girlfriend, Sally Mannis (Maura Tierney), the local veterinarian, has been waiting seven years for him to pop the question, contenting herself in the meantime with delivering litters of cute puppies.
Mooseport is thrown into a tizzy when Monroe Cole (Gene Hackman), known as Eagle, a vaguely Clintonesque, immensely popular former president, decides to take up permanent residence at his Mooseport vacation home. Persuaded by some local burghers to run, apparently unopposed, for the vacant office of mayor, Cole sees an easy public relations victory. But as luck would have it, Handy has also filed for the office, thus pitting the canny, cynical professional politician against the one thing canny, cynical professional politicians apparently fear most: ''a genuinely honest man,'' as one of Cole's aides (the former child star Fred Savage) describes the relentlessly modest, affable Handy.
Complicating matters -- though not by much -- is Cole's crush on Sally, whom he has met in passing and innocently asked out on a date. Hoping to make Handy jealous, Sally plays up to the former president, turning the political rivalry into a personal one for her affections.
''Welcome to Mooseport,'' which opens today nationwide, is oversupplied with excellent actors (also in the cast are Rip Torn as Cole's chief political adviser and Marcia Gay Harden as Cole's dedicated executive secretary) but undersupplied with wit and dramatic interest. The immensely likable Mr. Romano (star of television's ''Everybody Loves Raymond'') and the charmingly pouty Ms. Tierney (a regular on ''E.R.'') make a lovely sitcom couple, and ''Mooseport'' could easily serve as a pilot for a new series. Mr. Hackman fills the role of special guest star, floating above and apart from the rest of the cast, descending occasionally for a verbal wrestling bout or a bit of broad slapstick.
Mr. Petrie, a director best known for making a star of Julia Roberts in ''Mystic Pizza'' (1988), gums his way through an already soft script, carefully effacing whatever hint of political commentary may lie in the screenplay. (We never learn which party Cole belongs to, though he is briefly seen looking at a letter from the Democratic National Committee.) But there is already a political statement in the film's unthinking assumption that it is personality, not ideology, that matters most in contemporary American politics. As Mooseport goes, so goes the nation.
''Welcome to Mooseport'' 
~
Tweeners -- that audience of preadolescent girls caught between Nickelodeon and MTV -- are the demographic target of ''Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen,'' a Walt Disney production starring the apple-cheeked Lindsay Lohan.
Ms. Lohan, who made her movie debut in Disney's 1998 remake of ''The Parent Trap'' and co-starred with Jamie Lee Curtis in last year's sleeper ''Freaky Friday,'' looks to have about 15 minutes left on the meter as a child star. Now 17, she is becoming distinctly womanly and will probably turn up soon as a rival to Kate Hudson and Drew Barrymore in romantic comedies intended for older girls.
But for the moment she still has her bright-eyed, baby-fat innocence, which serves her well in this modest, mildly engaging film.
A proudly bohemian resident of Greenwich Village, Ms. Lohan's Lola is uprooted from Manhattan and transplanted to a prosperous suburb in New Jersey when her mom (the enduring Glenne Headly), a potter, decides she has had enough of the big city.
Used to being the center of attention with her swirling outfits, honey blond hair and flair for self-dramatization (she dreams of becoming an actress), Lola is astonished to find herself the odd girl out at her new school, dominated by uptight preppies led by the imperious Carla (Megan Fox).
To wrest away Carla's crown, Lola must beat her out for the lead in the school play (a musical production of ''Pygmalion'' retitled ''Eliza Rocks'') and gain entry to a super-cool party in SoHo thrown by the rock star of her dreams, Stu Wolff (Adam Garcia). With the help of her new best friend, the mousy, uncertain Ella (Alison Pill), Lola lays her elaborate plans.
''Confessions,'' which opens today nationwide, was directed by the British filmmaker Sara Sugarman (''Very Annie Mary''), which may explain why its New Jersey looks more like Beverly Hills than North Caldwell. It seems to function on a similar cultural basis, grounded in conspicuous consumption and the pursuit of celebrity. (Of course, it's also the kind of New Jersey you reach by taking the PATH train.)
The screenplay by Gail Parent (who wrote ''Cadet Kelly'' for Ms. Lohan's archrival, Hilary Duff) walks a fine line between celebrating Lola's bluntly materialistic values and teaching little moral lessons: one should not lie to one's best friend, for example. There are a few traces of what once may have been a subplot involving Lola's attempts to reunite her divorced parents (her dad is a children's book writer who still lives in Manhattan), but for the most part Lola is a totally and unapologetically self-involved creature. Tweeners will love her.
''Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen'' 
~
''Against the Ropes,'' a corny new feminist-uplift boxing picture starring Meg Ryan and Omar Epps, was, according to the press notes, inspired by the true story of Jackie Kallen, one of the few women ever to succeed as a manager of professional fighters. What this inspiration means is that the movie, directed by Charles S. Dutton from a script by Cheryl Edwards, is not a biography of Ms. Kallen, but rather an entirely fictional piece about a female boxing manager (Ms. Ryan) who happens to have the same name.
The real Ms. Kallen, who is listed in the credits as an associate producer and appears on screen in a brief cameo playing a sports reporter, clearly did not mind, but I suspect that her own story is much more interesting, or at least not quite so cluttered with inspirational sports-movie clichés.
To play Ms. Kallen, Ms. Ryan cuts her natural charm with fast-talking abrasiveness, speaking in the harsh, flat accent of the urban Midwest. (The movie, filmed in Toronto, takes place in Cleveland; both the real Ms. Kallen and her movie alter ego come from Detroit.) Her short, tight skirts and lace-up tops, combined with her confrontational manner, will remind viewers, perhaps intentionally, of Julia Roberts in ''Erin Brockovich.'' Like the heroine of that movie, Jackie starts out as an office underling and, by dint of her natural moxie and her refusal to take no for an answer, quickly rises above her humble station.
Her boss, Irving Abel (Joe Cortese), who runs the Cleveland Coliseum, is a classic pig, demanding that Jackie bring him coffee, taking credit for her good ideas and blaming her for his blunders. Sam LaRocca (Tony Shalhoub), the dapper and vicious kingpin of the local fight scene, is even worse, taking a special pleasure in humiliating Jackie.
By the end, you will not be surprised to hear, comeuppances are handed out all around. But first, of course, Jackie must learn some valuable lessons about the price of success and struggle with the inner conflict between her generous, honorable impulses and her ravenous ambition.
The first boxer she tries to manage turns out to be a hopeless crackhead, but happily, the thug (Mr. Epps) who bursts into his apartment during Jackie's visit and beats the stuffing out of him turns out to be quite a prospect. Jackie makes bail for this rough diamond, whose name is Luther Shaw, and hooks him up with a crusty, semiretired trainer named Felix (Mr. Dutton). Before long Luther, a left-handed middleweight with a ferocious punch and a passing resemblance to Marvin Hagler, is angling for a shot at the title.
Jackie, meanwhile, is in danger of being seduced by her own celebrity, upstaging Luther at news conferences and betraying the local sports journalist (Tim Daly) who had been her friend and champion. The drama, like the fight sequences, is handled with a competence that is more flat-footed than inspiring.
Some of the performances show flashes of idiosyncrasy and flair that are nearly snuffed out by the pedestrian script. It is always a pleasure to see Kerry Washington (the star of ''Our Song'' and ''Lift,'' two wonderful and under-seen recent independent films), even in the underwritten role of Jackie's sidekick and Luther's love interest.
Mr. Shalhoub has a fine time playing the heavy, and Mr. Dutton grumbles his way through the picture with a twinkle of aggressive mischief, as if to say: ''Yeah, I'm a walking cliché. Want to make something of it?'' Ms. Ryan's performance is an admirable if not entirely persuasive attempt to play against type, a character in search of a better movie.
The film, which opens nationwide today, glances at some of the tensions and conflicts that hover over the world of boxing like a cloud of stale cigar smoke, but it can't find a way to deal with issues of racial exploitation, brutal hyper-masculinity, pervasive corruption and casual misogyny in the framework of its cheery, prepackaged inspiration.
''Against the Ropes'' 
~
''Miracle,'' the movie version of the 1980 United States Olympic hockey team's Cinderella season, faces a hurdle that most fact-based films don't have to contemplate: the actual story the picture is based on was so corny and rousing that it hit all the notes many filmmakers would have too much shame to embrace. Fortunately -- or unfortunately, depending on how you look at it -- Disney, the studio that brought us ''The Rookie'' and ''The Mighty Ducks'' (the movie and the team/merchandising operation), has no such restraint.
Accordingly, ''Miracle'' does a yeoman's job of recycling the day-old dough that passes for its story. You can feel the film chafing against restrictions, given that many of the principals, like the goalie Jim Craig (Eddie Cahill) and the team captain Mike Eruzione (Patrick O'Brien Demsey), are still alive.
And since ''Miracle,'' which opens nationwide today, is aimed mostly at an audience that wasn't even born when the coach Herb Brooks's boys defeated the fearsome Soviet hockey team at Lake Placid, N.Y., younger audiences may not recognize the picture's staleness; that may make ''Miracle'' chewier. The movie efficiently delivers the story points, though nonsports fans should be warned: the climax features an almost 20-minute re-creation of the penultimate 1980 game between the Americans and the Soviets. (Team U.S.A. won the gold in the next game, against Finland, which the movie glides over.)
The voice-over from Kurt Russell (as Brooks, the taciturn, determined misfit who seizes the chance to lead the team his way when it is offered) recognizes that this event preceded the Dream Team invention. That device allowed American professionals to play in the Olympics, as well as professionals on other nations' teams.
The sad truth is that the United States Olympic basketball team has now become the equivalent of the dominating Soviets.
The Soviet hockey players were then the experienced, intimidating squad that whipped all comers, including a National Hockey League all-star team and, a week before the Olympics began, the very squad that Brooks assembled in an exhibition game. (Brooks, who died in an auto accident last year, once joked that he knew his team had already lost that game when he saw them applauding as their opponents took the ice.)
The external details are all in place: a number of clips from period shows and news programs, in which jolts like oil shortages and Jimmy Carter's troubled presidency (rocked further by the fall of the United States Embassy in Tehran and the taking of hostages) are damaging the national psyche. At least the movie has the good grace not to rely on clips from ABC, which has become a part of Disney; the Mean Joe Greene ''Coke and a smile'' commercial will swell tear ducts just as surely as the movie itself does.
There's nothing new in the picture's rote reiteration of history, evoking a period long ago and far away; did Nelly introduce ''Hot in Here'' for the 1980 Winter Olympics, before he reprised it on Sunday for the Super Bowl? But ''Miracle'' wasn't created for anyone looking for a surprise in the filmmaking, since the true-life story can be seen in all its primitive glory occasionally on ESPN Classic. (One of the executive producers, the HBO Sports president, Ross Greenburg, was responsible for a cable documentary using the same material, ''Do You Believe in Miracles? The Story of the 1980 U.S. Hockey Team,'' which may explain why the title was shortened here.)
The most important detail is Mr. Russell, wearing Brooks's uniform of sports jacket and checked bell-bottoms; it's been so long that those pants can now be seen on the runway during Fashion Week. Mr. Russell's own healthy head of hair was dyed and tamed into Brooks's 80's thick helmet-coif. The hair is almost the key to the performance; it's as stiff, unmovable and unforgiving as Brooks.
Mr. Russell tightens his face, limiting nearly all movement to his lower jaw. He plays Brooks as a man who refuses to waste emotion; it's why his driving his team so hard seems partly a shock, because he's not initially a bellower. (This small facet of the performance helps when it's revealed that Brooks wants to be hated, so the team can bond in its dislike of him.)
Taking a group of young, unproven players allows him to beat them down by constant pressure into the unit he wants -- he says they may not be the best team, but they're the right one. Mr. Russell's cagey and remote performance gives ''Miracle'' its few breezes of fresh air. He's yet to give a good performance in a movie people have turned out for; this may be his chance to realize an achievement similar to that of the man he plays.
And since Mr. Russell gets more screen time than anyone other than the broadcaster Al Michaels, playing himself, it's good to see that he's capable of maintaining focus. Eventually, it may seem that the real star of ''Miracle'' is Mr. Michaels, the ABC sportscaster whose heartfelt, enthusiastic cry ''Do you believe in miracles? Yes!'' was the shout heard 'round the world -- or at least 'round the contiguous United States.
His commentary is used for so much of the pivotal sequence, the big-screen re-playing of the game between the Americans and the Soviets, that Mr. Michaels should get a special screen credit. We can only hope that the good folks at ABC Sports are properly rewarded for his thrillingly apt play-by-play.
The director Gavin O'Connor's previous feature was the 1999 close-quarters independent film ''Tumbleweeds,'' and he gets the pounding effect of Brooks's drilling of his squad, which induces distaste from his assistant Craig Patrick (Noah Emmerich). The director handles the scenes of Brooks's personal life simply: standard stuff in which the coach ignores his family to bring his dream to life.
The screenwriter Eric Guggenheim has made those scenes, in which the gifted Patricia Clarkson plays Brooks's wife, Patty, more about a household power struggle than merely about a man immersed in his job.
Patty is not just along for the ride and wants him to pay attention to the other parts of his life. Ms. Clarkson forsakes her genteel good humor and goes just as flinty as her husband; it justifies a later scene when he kisses her hand.
That's the kind of phenomenon that has as much impact as the games played in ''Miracle.''
''Miracle'' 
~
Directed by Bart Freundlich
PG, 92 minutes
The ultimate ''don't try this at home'' movie, ''Catch That Kid'' is a children's film about three preteenagers who pull a bank heist.
Of course they have their reasons. Maddy (Kristen Stewart), the group's precocious ringleader, has a father (Sam Robards) in the hospital, in need of a $250,000 spinal operation that can be performed only in Denmark. Maddy's mother, Molly (Jennifer Beals), is a security expert who has just designed a fiendishly complicated vault for a greedy, coldhearted banker (Michael Des Barres). Maddy's father is a nice guy, and the banker is not; that seems to be more than enough moral justification for the screenwriters, Michael Brandt and Derek Haas, authors of that finely nuanced study in ethics and responsibility, ''2 Fast 2 Furious.''
Maddy enlists the aid of two male friends, Austin (Corbin Bleu), a computer nerd, and Gus (Max Thieriot), a mechanical wizard, by employing a feminine strategy that would seem cynical coming from Lola Montes, much less a 12-year-old: she tells each of the boys that she's in love with him and him alone.
Breaking into the bank turns out to be a breeze, once Maddy has seduced her mother's supervisor (John Carroll Lynch) into giving her the master code to the building's electronic locks. But she still needs Austin to neutralize the surveillance cameras and Gus to construct three supercharged go-karts, which the children use to make a high-speed getaway through the streets of downtown Los Angeles.
Based on a Danish children's film, ''Klatretosen,'' ''Catch That Kid,'' which opens today nationwide, is the first mainstream studio movie from Bart Freundlich, who made ''The Myth of Fingerprints'' and ''World Traveler'' as an independent. Mr. Freundlich's naturalistic sensibility gets in the way of the film's broad fantasy elements, turning what might have been a stylized romp like Robert Rodriguez's ''Spy Kids'' into something a little too real for comfort.
''Catch That Kid'' 
~
A movie featuring Ice Cube bellowing ''No more profanity!'' and meaning it should produce a lot more laughs than the intermittently amusing ''Barbershop 2: Back in Business'' does. This film seems to be ''All About the Benjamins,'' to use the title of an Ice Cube action comedy. Most of the decisions involving this sequel to the spirited original ''Barbershop'' -- a movie that itself cobbled together pieces of other projects -- are about carefully retracing the steps of that 2002 hit to keep those $100 Benjamins flowing. But although Ice Cube's business sense is right on the money, the minor surprises of the first film are gone.
Ice Cube returns as star and executive producer of ''Barbershop 2.'' His Calvin Palmer provides the common sense that holds the shop together, a glue it desperately needs. That's because the moneyed inner-city entrepreneur Quentin Leroux (Harry Lennix) is determined to put up a group of bourgeois franchises like Jamba Juice in the South Side Chicago neighborhood of Calvin's shop. Calvin is unfazed by this -- at least as unfazed as the easily riled Ice Cube can be.
''As long as they ain't building no liquor stores'' -- or stripper bars -- ''I'm cool with that,'' he says with a shrug; it seems that Calvin learned the lesson about strip joints from the misogynistic ''Players Club,'' Ice Cube's sole directing effort.
But when Quentin builds a lavish competitor called Nappy Cutz right across the street from Calvin's shop, the battle is on -- Calvin has to fight to keep his shop alive. Nappy Cutz is described as a black version of Supercuts, but since Cutz features bikini waxing and a basketball court, either I haven't been in Supercuts in a long time or the writer of ''Barbershop 2'' is indulging in a fantasy.
The picture, directed by Kevin Rodney Sullivan, is a loving tribute to black culture, and the opening credits whir through the history of the African-American coif, making brief stops at the scary curl sported by N.W.A. and at Vanilla Ice's I'm-so-off-white fade. The film is kicked off by a flashback to 1967 that explains how Eddie (Cedric the Entertainer) became a fixture at the shop, then owned by Calvin's father. This funny and evocative sequence ends with the young Eddie's head being shorn -- ''I told you to pretend you was cuttin' it off,'' he sobs.
Eddie's history is the subject of several other flashbacks, interwoven into the contemporary gentrification plot that's also part of another ghetto barbershop comedy, ''Who's the Man?'' (1993). That film shares a cast member with ''Barbershop 2'': Queen Latifah, who in the current movie plays Calvin's former flame, Gina.
Gina runs the beauty shop across the street and has a toe-to-toe comic battle with Eddie that runs out of juice faster than a home permanent kit. Her brief yet underwritten appearance is intended to prime audiences for a ''Barbershop'' spinoff, ''Beauty Shop,'' due later this year. Given the stature and the presence that the entrepreneurial rappers-turned-film-moguls Ice Cube and Queen Latifah possess, the fizzle of their scenes is doubly disappointing.
It's probably fitting that ''Barbershop 2'' features rappers, since much of the movie feels sampled from a stack of old-school influences. Even the underscore to Eddie's flashback scenes -- Stevie Wonder's ''I Wish'' -- is redolent of something else.
Most of the characters from the first ''Barbershop'' can be found working their stations. Troy Garity -- all slow-talking, white-chocolate smooth -- returns as Isaac, the shop's answer to Justin Timberlake, and Michael Ealy is back as the ex-con and would-be roughneck Ricky. Eve reprises the wise-cracking Terri, though her edges are softened enough to give pause to all of the regulars except the smitten African, Dinka (Leonard Earl Howze, who provides a lovely, mellow dignity for the character).
All of these secondhand elements, combined with the threat to Calvin's place, give this movie a slightly melancholic tone; the only thing that's missing is Ice Cube sitting in the front seat of a lowrider, musing that it was a good day. The bittersweet aspects add texture, but they can't make up for the lack of comedy in a film that is positioned to be one; there were more laughs in Ice Cube's last picture, the biker saga ''Torque.''
Most of the humor burden falls to Cedric, who peppers the ball field with singles -- he's just not enough to bring the whole team home on his own. Eddie gets provocative lines, like ''The D.C. sniper is like the Jackie Robinson of crime,'' nuggets guaranteed to cause squabbles.
In the first ''Barbershop,'' Eddie got off a few stingers that made the Rev. Jesse Jackson's temperature rise; surely he had heard more challenging dialogue in a barbershop before. ''Barbershop 2,'' which opens nationwide today, ends with Eddie's being dared to insult Luther Vandross, and he comes dangerously close before backing off. It's too bad -- the one thing this film's predecessor had going for it was knowing that there's never too much.
''Barbershop 2: Back in Business'' 
~
Coming at the end of a dismal and frigid January, ''The Big Bounce,'' directed by George Armitage from a script by Sebastian Gutierrez, is like a paid Hawaiian vacation -- somebody else's. Everyone involved with this picture, the second screen adaptation of Elmore Leonard's first foray into crime fiction, seems to have had a good time making it, which was nice for them, but it may not do you much good. There are a few vicarious pleasures to be gleaned --a pungent, off-kilter one-liner here, a sly sight gag there, enough smooth, uncovered flesh to titillate all tastes and persuasions -- but the movie itself seems to have been misplaced amid all the sun and surf, the pineapples and bikinis.
What remains is a loose and lazy caper, held together by the decidedly unstrenuous performances of a gaggle of charming and attractive actors, many of them apparently flown in for a handful of scenes and a round of tropical drinks. Gary Sinise, as a ruthless hotel developer with vague underworld ties, sneers and grimaces a few times and then tumbles headlong down a flight of stairs. Willie Nelson and Harry Dean Stanton play dominoes. Charlie Sheen, adorned with thankless facial hair, takes off his shoes and receives a punch in the nose (though not in that order). Bebe Neuwirth, whose pallor suggests that all her scenes were filmed right after her plane landed, opens a parasol, crashes a grocery cart, pours herself a few drinks, and fires a gun (more or less in that order).
The bulk of the work -- if you can call it that -- is handled by Owen Wilson, Morgan Freeman and Sara Foster, a fetching former magazine model who slips comfortably into the movie's easygoing ambience (and out of various flimsy garments). Mr. Wilson, with his usual relaxed demeanor, plays Jack Ryan, one of the genial small-time crooks dear to Mr. Leonard's heart. Jack, a onetime legitimate employee of Mr. Sinise's character, finds himself mixed up with Walter Crewes (Mr. Freeman), a local judge with a side interest in vacation real estate, and also with Nancy Hayes (Ms. Foster), the mogul's mistress. He teaches her how to break into beach houses in broad daylight, and she recruits him for a big score.
The usual double-crosses and convolutions ensue, but the narrative is so haphazard that the whole thing -- both the caper and the movie that contains it -- seems to have been hastily improvised. In Mr. Leonard's fiction the plot is often a swift, functional vehicle for comic observation and piquant characterization, and Mr. Armitage, who directed ''Miami Blues'' and ''Grosse Pointe Blank,'' has previously shown a knack for this kind of offhand, comic-noir storytelling.
Mr. Wilson, with his drawling, self-interrupting delivery and a demeanor that simultaneously suggests great intelligence and a commensurate reluctance to apply it, is always fun to watch. But with its feel-no-pain Jimmy Buffett vibe, ''The Big Bounce,'' which opens nationwide today, might have been made by one of Mr. Buffett's more dissolute beach-bum characters.
''We need a new plan,'' Walter remarks toward the end, at which point you may still not be too clear on what the old plan was. But nobody else seems to be, either, and if it doesn't bother them, I guess I'm in no position to complain. ''Sometimes,'' Walter says earlier, offering a bit of inexplicable wisdom to Jack, ''things are exactly as they appear.'' True enough. And sometimes, a movie can be even less than meets the eye.
''The Big Bounce'' 
~
''The Perfect Score,'' which opens nationwide today, is a thin, pleasant teenage heist comedy with a chewy nugget of social criticism buried inside it. Actually, it isn't buried very deep at all. The movie, directed by Brian Robbins from a script by Mark Schwahn, Marc Hyman and Jon Zack, begins with an indictment of the Scholastic Aptitude Test, and pauses several times in the course of its desultory action to complain about the regime of standardized testing that turns America's young people from vibrant, complicated individuals into calculable quantities, pigeonholing them before they have figured out who they are.
One of the problems with timed standardized testing, according to Anna (Erika Christensen), an academic superachiever whose parents are pushing her to go to Brown, is ''stereotype vulnerability,'' the tendency of members of certain groups to perform not according to their abilities but according to societal expectations. I'm in no position to judge the merits of this theory with respect to the SAT, but stereotype vulnerability afflicts just about every movie set in an American high school.
A semi-snide allusion is made to ''The Breakfast Club,'' John Hughes's melodrama of suburban detention-hall bonding, and ''The Perfect Score'' similarly assembles a collection of familiar types. In addition to uptight Anna, there is pouty, punky Francesca (Scarlett Johansson, in what is probably the last of her schoolgirl sidekick roles); Roy, the stoner (Leonardo Nam, a newcomer and natural scene-stealer); and Desmond (Darius Miles of the Portland Trail Blazers), a star athlete.
What brings them together is a plan hatched by Kyle (Chris Evans) and Matty (Bryan Greenberg), best pals who are too bland to be stereotypes, to redress the injustice of the SAT by breaking into Educational Testing Service headquarters and stealing the answers. Kyle, who dreams of being an architect, does not have the scores for Cornell, and Matty's are too low for the University of Maryland, where he wants to go to be reunited with his girlfriend.
The other four have their own reasons for going along with the scheme, which proceeds in spite of the usual security cameras and night watchmen. The heist plot, in any case, is really meant to provide the characters with a chance to challenge one another's prejudices (and those of the audience) and to learn the kind of valuable lessons that show up only on exams at screenwriting school.
''Perfect Score'' addresses matters of race, sex and class in a whisper and is perhaps too quick to assert the essential niceness of its characters. But they are likable enough, and the movie's combination of earnestness and cheek is likely to appeal to young people in need of relief from their post-holiday academic stress.
It is hardly surprising that in the end the filmmakers sell out the radicalism of their premise, and slink away from the anti-testing barricades, but it also feels like a bit of a cheat.
''The Perfect Score'' 
~
Mountain climbing has long provided a seductive metaphor for spiritual quests, ever since Moses went up Mount Sinai and came down with the Ten Commandments.
We may no longer expect explicit spiritual guidance in our mountain movies, but a film like Kevin Macdonald's disappointing ''Touching the Void,'' a British semidocumentary that opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is still very much concerned with notions of purification and transcendence, of slipping the bonds of ordinary material existence and entering a new, elevated realm of stark simplicity, elemental forces and moral clarity.
The mountain movies that were popular in Germany in the late 20's and early 30's, many starring Leni Riefenstahl and Luis Trenker, pointed a clear way out of the messy conflicts and confusions of the Weimar era. Unfortunately, however, they pointed to Hitler, who quickly appropriated the mountain imagery for his own propaganda ends.
In keeping with our current ideologies, the climb in ''Touching the Void'' is treated less like a religious retreat than a psychological encounter session, a high-altitude group-therapy meeting that allows its two real-life protagonists, the British climbers Joe Simpson and Simon Yates, to learn important lessons about themselves and their inter-personal relationships.
With the use of staged, pseudo-documentary sequences, the film reconstructs the disastrous 1985 attempt that Mr. Simpson and Mr. Yates made on the 21,000-foot Siula Grande in the Peruvian Andes. All went well for three days until Mr. Simpson fell and drove his lower leg into his kneecap, leaving him crippled. Mr. Yates tried to lower Mr. Simpson down the mountainside with a climbing rope, but accidentally lowered him into a deep crevasse. Receiving no response from his partner, Mr. Yates was faced with a terrible choice: either to stay and hold on to the rope, at the risk of being eventually pulled into the ravine by Mr. Simpson's body weight, or to cut the rope and try to save himself.
While the actors Brendan Mackey (as Mr. Simpson) and Nicholas Aaron (as Mr. Yates) recreate the climb on camera (with the help of climbing doubles), clambering through locations that range from the actual Peruvian mountain to Mount Blanc in the Alps, the genuine Mr. Simpson and Mr. Yates narrate their adventures from an unidentified cozy, warm place just off screen. Because we already know the two men will survive, suspense is at a minimum; the film is more concerned with the awful suffering they endured, tortures both mental (as Mr. Yates struggles with the decision to cut the cord) and physical (as Mr. Simpson finds himself in the pit of an ice cave, barely able to crawl and with no obvious way out).
This is compelling stuff, but there is something deeply distracting in the use of recreated material. Mr. Macdonald, the director, imitates a raw, video-based cinéma vérité style, but fairly often places the camera in locations that would be inaccessible to a cameraman on the actual expedition (for example, when Mr. Simpson falls into the crevasse, the camera crew is already there to meet him).
Just as Mr. Simpson falls into the physical hell of the mountain's cavernous innards, so does Mr. Yates confront the moral hell of being forced -- or so he believes -- to sacrifice his partner in order to save himself. The lesson of ''Touching the Void'' is that both experiences not only can be survived, but also can be an occasion for what the daytime talk shows call ''personal growth.'' Having come through, having touched the void and been touched by it, Mr. Simpson and Mr. Yates are shown as elevated spirits, with a new sense of what is important in their lives and what is not. It is apparently not only the church that now produces saints but also extreme sports as well.
TOUCHING THE VOID
Directed by Kevin Macdonald; based on the book by Joe Simpson; director of photography, Mike Eley; edited by Justine Wright; music by Alex Heffes; produced by John Smithson; co-producer, Sue Summers; released by IFC Films. Running time: 102 minutes. This film is not rated .
WITH: Joe Simpson and Simon Yates (themselves) and Brendan Mackey (Joe Simpson) and Nicholas Aaron (Simon Yates).

~

~
Even by the lax standards of January film releases -- this month is the traditional dumping time for studio films that didn't quite work out -- ''The Butterfly Effect'' is staggeringly bad.
Starring Ashton Kutcher, the shaggy-haired young actor best known for ''Dude, Where's My Car?'' and for dating Demi Moore, ''Butterfly'' is a supposed thriller that mines the memory loss theme that has been turning up with striking regularity in American movies, from ''Memento'' to ''Paycheck.'' Mr. Kutcher's character, Evan Treborn, is an earnest college student whose life has been marked by a series of blackouts surrounding traumatic events. Majoring in psychology (he keeps a rat maze in his dorm room), he hopes to discover the reason behind the mysterious black holes in his mind.
Simple self-protection might be one possible explanation, given that his repressed memories include, as the film reveals in a spiraling series of flashbacks, being nearly strangled to death as an 8-year-old by his criminally insane father; being forced to participate in a child pornography video directed by the abusive father (Eric Stoltz) of the little girl, Kayleigh, he has a crush on; watching as a young woman and her baby are blown to bits in a practical joke gone wrong; and watching as the neighborhood bully, Tommy (who also happens to be Kayleigh's brother), ties Evan's beloved terrier up in a canvas bag and sets it on fire. That's a lot to handle right there, but the film's writing and directing team, Eric Bress and J. Mackye Gruber, have some even more appalling atrocities in store for Evan as a young adult.
For reasons the film does not trouble to explain, Evan discovers that, if he reads a few lines from his childhood journals, he will be projected back in time to his traumatic moments, where he can change his behavior in small ways that will make a big difference later on. (This is where the title comes in, with its reference to the old canard about a butterfly flapping its wings in China and producing a tidal wave in New York.)
Sometimes Evan's adjustments seem to work out, as when he awakes from a time-travel session to find himself sharing a sorority house bed with Kayleigh, now grown into a radiantly happy 18-year-old (played by Amy Smart). But mostly his changes just lead to greater disasters, including one alternate reality in which Kayleigh is a scarred, drug-addled prostitute, living in what looks like Jodi Foster's old digs in ''Taxi Driver,'' and another in which Evan loses his arms and the use of his legs.
The complicated plotting soon spins wildly out of the control of the filmmakers (their last credit: ''Final Destination 2'') and begins producing unintentional laughs, as when Evan wakes up to find himself the newest and prettiest resident of a prison full of predatory neo-Nazi homosexuals.
But if the storytelling induces brain cramp, the imagery brings on a bad case of acid indigestion. The filmmakers return again and again to their movie's most repulsive visuals: the two naked children standing before a video camera, the dog squirming in the flaming bag, the mother, with her baby in her arms, approaching the mailbox in which Tommy has planted a lighted stick of dynamite. ''The Butterfly Effect,'' which opens nationwide today, is inhabited by a genuine spirit of cruelty, both toward its characters and its audience.
''The Butterfly Effect'' has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes several scenes of graphic violence, many directed against children and animals.
THE BUTTERFLY EFFECT
Written and directed by Eric Bress and J. Mackye Gruber; director of photography, Matthew F. Leonetti; edited by Peter Amundson; music by Michael Suby; production designer, Douglas Higgins; produced by Chris Bender, A. J. Dix, Anthony Rhulen and J C Spink; released by New Line Cinema. Running time: 113 minutes. This film 
~
Quirky romantic pairings are always a risky gamble in Hollywood, but out of those rare occasions when the odd-couple friction sets off the kind of sparks generated by Humphrey Bogart and Katharine Hepburn in ''The African Queen,'' movie legends are born. When the chemistry fizzles, as in the teaming of Ben Stiller and Jennifer Aniston in ''Along Came Polly,'' the only thing produced is an irritating heat rash. Watching these two go at it is almost as uncomfortable as observing the 60-something Woody Allen nuzzling a beauty less than half his age.
Theoretically the notion of Mr. Stiller as a phobia-ridden risk assessor for an insurance company loosened up by Ms. Aniston as a carefree daredevil isn't wholly implausible. But this flat romantic comedy, written and directed by John Hamburg (one of the writers of ''Meet the Parents'' and ''Zoolander'') fails to provide any reason a spunky free-spirited girl-next-door like Ms. Aniston's character, Polly Prince, would give Reuben Feffer, Mr. Stiller's uptight nerd, a second glance. True, Reuben is a nice Jewish boy, but as we all know, nice has nothing to do with hot. Reuben is so obsessed with statistics that he counts the seconds to himself as he makes love and makes personal choices based on a device that analyzes data and spews out percentages.
Mr. Stiller, with his bony, oversize head protruding from a torso that seems perpetually knotted in a tense bodybuilder's pose, often gives the impression of a turtle anxiously peering out of its shell, startled and bug-eyed. Ms. Aniston, in contrast, exudes the confident nonchalance of an attractive young everywoman in the pink of health.
''Along Came Polly,'' which opens today nationwide, doesn't lack for names in its supporting cast. Philip Seymour Hoffman, in his slobby mode, is Reuben's best friend, Sandy Lyle, a failed actor clinging to his one fading moment of semi-fame who is reduced to playing Judas in a community theater production of ''Jesus Christ Superstar!'' Alec Baldwin, shamelessly hamming it up as Reuben's go-getting boss, is a New York Jewish caricature.
The bottom drops out of Reuben's world early in the movie when, on the first day of his Caribbean honeymoon, his new wife, Lisa (Debra Messing), deserts him for Claude (Hank Azaria), a well-muscled but pretentious French scuba-diving instructor. Reuben flees back to New York in the throes of despair and begins dating Polly, a former high school classmate who works as a part-time caterer and keeps a pet ferret.
Their courtship begins on a rocky note when Polly suggests they go to a Moroccan restaurant and Reuben's fragile digestive system goes haywire. ''Along Came Polly'' is so desperate for laughs that it clings to the running joke of Reuben's irritable bowel syndrome and its associated sound effects. The spectacle of two mature stars forced to grovel in the bathroom for cheap laughs is pathetic.
Each time the movie's verbal humor falls flat, ''Along Came Polly'' reminds you how difficult it is to write comic banter that is genuinely funny. The movie does a little better when the humor is physical. To win Polly's respect, Reuben secretly takes salsa dancing lessons. The scene in which he unveils his newly acquired skill, hurling himself around like a spastic John Travolta, is the movie's funniest. Other scenes in which he tries to charm an accident-prone Australian daredevil and wealthy chief executive (Bryan Brown) into buying life insurance also kick up a little zany energy.
But ''Along Came Polly'' can't transcend its central miscasting. It will take a better film than this one to make Ms. Aniston a full-blown movie star.
''Along Came Polly'' 
~
The monotonously macho action-adventure ''Torque,'' which opens nationwide today, wears testosterone as if it were a new fragrance from Mennen. Its motorcycle-riding morons circle one another, hissing threats and flaring their nostrils as if they were about to lash their wrists together and break into a dance number reminiscent of Michael Jackson's ''Beat It'' video.
They also do a lot of flexing and flashing of their tattoos -- which look like wall appliqués for a particularly surly 6-year-old's bedroom -- and seem to spend more time primping than Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie. At least the guys in the HBO series ''Oz'' are more direct when they're checking one another out. Sure, there are girls in ''Torque,'' but they seem like older-sister window dressing.
Chief among these idiots is Ford (Martin Henderson), who's just returned from Thailand, where he was either on a restful vacation or in flight from his enemies. But he can't just ride around greater downtown Barstow, Calif., on his bike or tune up his misfiring relationship with his ex-girl Shane (Monet Mazur), a bike-shop owner he abandoned. He's being stalked by the menacing motorcycle gang leader Henry James (Matt Schulze), who's so important a crime figure that even his grim whispers can be heard over the live thrash being played at a nightclub.
Apparently when not finishing a screenplay adaptation of his novel ''The Tragic Muse'' or working with Ismail Merchant, Henry runs a lucrative crystal meth business whose profits are threatened because Ford has possession of Henry's drugs. Naturally, Henry wants his valuable stash returned -- or else.
And there are other plot complications similar to those of Henry's novel ''The Portrait of a Lady.'' Henry has worked the rival biker gang leader Trey's bandanna into a knot. He tried to persuade Trey (Ice Cube) to join the drug business, but because Trey has the kind of scruples we've come to expect from most bike-tribe cynosures, he refuses. Henry kills Trey's little brother and frames Ford for the crime. Now, in addition to Henry's boys, the police and Trey's squad are also out to put their hands on Ford, who has to slip past all of them to get to Los Angeles. Why? So ''Torque'' can parade its colors as a tribute to Walter Hill's haiku of a gang-action classic, ''The Warriors'' (1979), a movie that had less dialogue and far more wit than ''Torque.''
All you can say about the producer Neal H. Moritz -- who brought us ''The Fast and the Furious'' and ''2 Fast 2 Furious,'' which are worse than ''Torque,'' despite its serial dopiness -- is that his movies have a sense of humor.
The silliness is infectious, even though his pictures tend to overmythologize the urban man's romance with the internal-combustion engine. With everyone all done up in multicolored cycle leathers, ''Torque'' ends up resembling a reunion tour of those new jack swing stars, Guy. Mr. Moritz's characters -- brought to, um, life here by the writer Matt Johnson -- have something in common with a song lyric by Blackstreet, another creation of the Guy producer Teddy Riley: all they wanna do is zoom-a-zoom zoom zoom.
Still, a few laughs seem intentional, like Adam Scott's hipster F.B.I. agent who talks in run-on sentences and dresses like a music executive in his rayon pinstripe suit, T-shirt and Chuck Taylors. And when Ford, whom Mr. Henderson manages to play with a sense of embarrassment, if not outright shame, says, ''I live my life a quarter-mile at a time,'' Shane responds, ''That is the dumbest thing I've heard.''
As Trey, Ice Cube is pretty funny, too. His snarl has become a national institution, like a Happy Meal; its threat has gone the way of his scary curl. He's now like an irritable next-door neighbor from a sitcom -- albeit one who might massage your uvula with a Glock -- and his persona is so much a part of the in-joke that one of his most infamous ''Straight Outta Compton''-era song titles is in ''Torque'' as a laugh line.
The director Joseph Kahn is familiar with the fellas'-pride-in-chrome ethos; his music video work goes back to the estimable Geto Boys' ''Straight Gangsterism'' and includes DMX's ''X Gon Give It to Ya.'' (The MTV ''Making of'' special on that one could be a movie in itself.)
There's street drama in those videos, but not in this film; the computer-generated special effects used to create the preposterous motorcycle stunts already seem a little dated. By Monday, ''Torque'' will look like a period piece with its expiration date, January 2004, prominently displayed. The inevitable movie-inspired video game will appear more realistic.
''Torque'' 
~
John Woo directing a Philip K. Dick adaptation: that certainly sounds like the opposite of coal in the stocking, or as good as a gift certificate from RadioShack. At least it might have sounded that way in 1990.
Since then Dick's posthumous legacy has suffered through movies like ''Impostor,'' and Mr. Woo made ''Windtalkers.''
For Mr. Woo, whose action-man motifs have been looted so thoroughly by other filmmakers that he could qualify for a creative version of Chapter 11, audience expectations are probably close to flatlining.
Yet ''Paycheck,'' which open today nationwide, is surprisingly . . . ept given that it is basically a dumb movie about smart people. This smooth but bland thriller may be the best we could expect from such a collaboration, especially when Ben Affleck, an actor whose calm exterior reflects an inability to project an inner life, enters the mix.
Mr. Affleck is Michael Jennings, a hotshot who has put his electronic genius out for hire to steal the ideas and properties of corporations and then refine them for competitors. It almost sounds like the story of Microsoft Word versus Apple except that for legal reasons Michael gets his mind wiped clean by a dangerous medical process that nearly boils his brain. This procedure also eliminates Michael's memory of the entire period he spent at work, all for a paycheck.
When a new, less dangerous memory-elimination procedure comes along, one that can safely do away with three years instead of a few months, Michael is invited by his old friend Rethrick (Aaron Eckhart) to get involved in a project that could change the world and net Michael an eight-figure income.
Michael will come out three years later with a larger bank balance, but with no idea of his accomplishments; it would be like winning a Golden Globe. The sleek, ascetic paranoia that Dick triggered in his short story ''Paycheck'' surfaces; it is the kind of home invasion of the mind and soul that inspired films based on the stories ''Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?'' (''Blade Runner'') and ''I Can Dream It for You Wholesale'' (''Total Recall'').
For Dick, having one's psyche manhandled was the most staggering crime imaginable; a million dollars was a mad chunk of cheddar in his world, but even today people are subjected to worse manipulation on ''The Bachelor'' for considerably less.
Dramatizing the terror that Dick saw in surrendering three years of one's life to someone else has fallen into the hands of a filmmaker whose techniques have been so rigorously studied and overused that Mr. Woo's life could be the subject of a Dick short story.
But ''Paycheck'' the film is not shocking; it is merely facile and unsettling. The Michael's troubled look while wrestling with his decision suggests annoyance, as if he had to walk an extra block to find a Leaf and Bean, rather than any agony over yielding control of his existence.
So ''Paycheck'' becomes a glib, scrambling action picture about Michael trying to pick up his life after emerging from his job and finding that everything has gone wrong: he is implicated in murder, and almost everyone on his tail is more interested in shooting first and asking questions later. And he has no memory to use to piece things together, just an envelope of personal possessions that don't match the items he had deposited three years earlier. His use of the stuff in the envelope makes ''Paycheck'' feel like a big episode of ''McGyver,'' and Mr. Affleck's confused sheepishness makes the conceit mildly entertaining.
''Paycheck'' is not much of a movie, though Mr. Affleck and Mr. Woo have definitely done worse. It could have been directed by anyone; unfortunately, Mr. Woo's gift for exploiting tension in closed spaces deserted him so long ago that it could be declared legally dead. (But there is a motorcycle-and-car chase sequence that gets his juices going.)
He works best with actors who understand the physical threat and plunge into the danger anyway. Paul Giamatti, as Michael's scientist pal, gets it. The ''Six Feet Under'' star Michael C. Hall, in his first feature film role as one of the cops prowling the situation room, is relegated to crossing his arms and raising a single eyebrow, a staple of too many recent Woo films.
As for Mr. Affleck, he is showing signs of becoming a believable action star; his stick-boxing technique is better here than in ''Daredevil.'' He looks good in the man-of-action Oswald Boateng-styled suits, designed to give him a futuristic cross between the man in an Arrow shirt ad and a character in ''The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit.''
Then again, most of the characterization in ''Paycheck'' is linked to appearance. For the sinister Rethrick, overzealous use of hair-care products makes the same impression that mustache wax did for silent-film villains.
Only Uma Thurman, as Rachel, a co-worker Michael may have loved in the past, draws on feelings that seem connected to the real world. She is the victim of psychic loss of the kind Dick describes; the collapse of her features when gazing at an unsure Michael provides a fleeting sadness. And she delivers a pretty impressive drop-kick.
Too bad it didn't occur to anyone to make her the lead.
''Paycheck'' 
~
The large-screen Imax film process is a form in search of content. Able to create an image several stories tall with crystalline clarity, this 70-millimeter format is so overwhelming that it upstages whatever material it presents. Call it the wow effect: when the viewer is knocked out by the visual splendor, it is difficult to concentrate on dramatic issues or become deeply involved with fictional characters.
The most successful Imax films have been documentaries like ''Space Station 3D'' and ''Everest,'' special-effects films and travelogues designed to show off the medium's potential without too much distracting information. Disney's''Young Black Stallion,'' opening nationwide , joins the small pool of films that have dared to use Imax to tell a story.
But it is a very small story stranded in a very large space. Based on a 1989 children's book by Walter and Steven Farley, the picture is a prequel to Walter Farley's ''Black Stallion,'' memorably filmed in 1979 by Carroll Ballard.
In the North African desert shortly after World War II, an Arab girl, Neera (Biana G. Tamimi), becomes separated from the caravan that is taking her from her ruined home in the city to her grandfather's formerly regal estate in the wilds. She is befriended by the frisky young colt of the title, which not only leads her to her grandfather's home but helps the family reclaim its lost greatness by winning a traditional high-stakes race against some neighboring tribal leaders. It is Neera of course who rides the young stallion to victory, scoring an anachronistic (but by now obligatory) feminist point.
With its relative dearth of incident Jeanne Rosenberg's screenplay is ideally suited to the 45-minute length imposed by the Imax format. Most of the movie is rightly devoted to stunning landscapes (shot in Namibia and South Africa, rather than the north) in which sand dunes and mountains seem to extend forever. The amazing depth of field of the Imax image is highlighted by several shots that seem interpolated from regular 35-millimeter cameras: fine enough under most conditions but disappointingly flat when so much else is so highly dimensional.
The Australian filmmaker Simon Wincer is a veteran of many children's adventure films, including ''Free Willy'' (1993), and he delivers a clean, straightforward product here. A bit of flavor is added by Richard Romanus, the actor best known as the silky apprentice godfather in ''Mean Streets,'' who here borrows Omar Sharif's accent and toothy smile to play the kindly grandfather.
Still, it is supremely easy for the eye to wander away from the tiny exchanges of dialogue in the foreground to the towering wonders of nature in the background. The format has yet to find a director who can balance characters and landscape within the Imax frame, as Raoul Walsh did in the pioneering 65-millimeter wide-screen epic of 1930, ''The Big Trail,'' or David Lean with the Super Panavision 70 format of ''Lawrence of Arabia.''
Walsh and Lean found reflections of their protagonist's inner states in the landscapes that surrounded them, a metaphorical approach that turned mere spectacle into genuine epic. Imax is still waiting for its transformative figure.
THE YOUNG BLACK STALLION
Directed by Simon Wincer; written by Jeanne Rosenberg, based on the novel by Walter Farley and Steven Farley; director of photography, Reed Smoot; edited by Bud Smith and Terry Blythe; music by William Ross; production designer, Paul Peters; produced by Fred Roos and Frank Marshall; released by Walt Disney Pictures. At Imax theaters nationwide. Running time: 50 minutes. This film 
~
''Calendar Girls'' is not nearly as mortifying as one of the most recent films to use the phrase ''based on a true story'' -- this fall's remake of ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre'' -- though the real-life story of ''Girls'' is particularly horrifying to at least one person: 16-year-old Jem (John-Paul MacLeod). Learning that his mother, Chris (Helen Mirren); her best chum, Annie (Julie Walters); and all of her middle-aged to elderly female friends are going to pose nude on a calendar to raise money for a local charity is a terrifying prospect for the boy.
Can anything be scarier for a teenage boy at his most self-conscious than learning his mom is at her most shameless and wants the whole town to know? It takes the sting out of Jem's having been caught with a lads' magazine featuring women with ''Bazooka City'' Post-its affixed to their breasts.
''Girls'' is yet another professionally acted and staged wry-crisp comedy about British modesty -- this one could be called ''How Full Was My Monty'' -- that gets its laughs, but seems increasingly out of date. Keep in mind that this mildly rendered social farce, directed by Nigel Cole, is set in a country where several newspapers featuring pictures of the captured Saddam Hussein probably also ran photos of topless babes straddling bazookas. But for the sake of propriety, ''Girls,'' set in rural Yorkshire, can't relinquish its embrace of convention, or else Chris would have nothing to do.
Initially Annie's travails in a small town, Knapely, inspire the calendar; she loses her husband, John (John Alderton), a florist, to cancer. Chris, who has been enduring her friend's plight at the hospital while perched on a lumpy couch as threadbare as many of the jokes in ''Girls,'' gets a noble idea. She wants to raise funds for a comfortable sofa for loved ones of cancer patients.
Both Chris and Annie are members of the Knapely chapter of the Women's Institute, an organization dedicated to promoting the ideals of ''fun and friendship'' -- or ''foon and friendship,'' as adorably pronounced here -- among its members. The easily bored Chris and the quick-to-giggle Annie cling to each other, desperate to keep straight faces during the arid lectures and demonstrations that the guest speakers drone through.
''If more people did W.I., there'd be half the need for hallucinogenic droogs,'' Chris says with a sigh.
Ms. Mirren and Ms. Walters are a graceful pair of troupers. The minty-cool Ms. Mirren is like a bebop drummer who shows she can downshift into playing three-chord pop changes without condescension -- well, without its being so apparent anyway. The deft Ms. Walters keeps time for her as admirably as the bassist Ron Carter might, and the director is sharp enough to back off and watch them work.
John was to be a Women's Institute speaker before his death, and he had a line comparing the women of Yorkshire to its flowers: ''The last stage is always the most glorious.'' His words ring throughout the movie; it's hard for them not to, since they're repeated several times.
Chris, spotting a girlie calendar at her auto mechanic's garage, is inspired with the notion of posing nude. Yes -- sigh -- there is resistance from the staid Institute leadership, but the willful Chris and devastated Annie press on, finding a surprisingly large number of recruits, including the nervous Ruth (Penelope Wilton) and the imperious but equally proud Celia (Celia Imrie). The women are photographed in mundane poses from their lives, like baking or tending to their gardens, except that they are nude, making for some of the most flavorless double-entendres this side of an episode of the British sitcom ''Are You Being Served?''
Their calendar becomes such a hit that they're invited stateside by the ''Tonight'' show, which puts them up in rooms the size of Knapely. Jay Leno makes his monthly film appearance, leading you to wonder how he finds time to do ''Tonight,'' even given his gargantuan stamina.
The film's writers, Juliette Towhidi and Tim Firth, use the aging models' growing fame for some sparkling comic moments. They're all stalked simultaneously by news camera crews. Mr. Cole and the cinematographer, Ashley Rowe, give Knapely a lived-in charm, so much so that the cast seems to have played these roles already.
It is fun seeing Ms. Mirren use her towering confidence, which could scare paint off a wall, to play and stroll through a role with a smile on her face, which she doesn't often get to do. The mounting homicide tolls on ''Prime Suspect'' don't leave much room for pleasure. She and Ms. Walters are a sunny, amusing team, even when there's tension between them because Chris has so immersed herself in her new celebrity that she's ignoring Jem and her calm, thoughtful husband, Rod (Ciaran Hinds).
The most likable aspect of the film is the husbands left on the sidelines, and the people behind ''Calendar Girls'' are savvy enough not to overplay that role reversal. But when the biggest compliment you can pay a picture is that it is professional and not smug, there's a little something missing, like invention. At least ''Girls,'' which opens nationwide today, was made in Britain. If it were American, it would already be spun off into a series reuniting Mary Tyler Moore and Valerie Harper. (Note to network programmers: Please don't think of this as a suggestion.)
''Calendar Girls'' 
~
''You can bake your cake and eat it too!'' says the reassuring slogan that distills the comfy revisionist feminism informing ''Mona Lisa Smile.'' That slogan is repeated empathically enough to qualify as the defining mantra of a movie that pretends to be audacious. And the lurking duplicity in that loaded word ''bake'' (remember Hillary Rodham Clinton's sarcastic remarks about baking cookies?) winds up applying to the movie itself. Like ''Down With Love'' earlier this year, ''Mona Lisa Smile'' preaches disruptive female self-empowerment out of one side of its mouth while out of the other it invokes the dream of being swept up, up and away by Prince Charming.
A miscast but irresistible Julia Roberts stars as Katherine Watson, a free-spirited Californian who moves East to teach at demure, snooty Wellesley College in 1953 and shakes up the place enough to be deemed subversive by the institution's hawk-eyed thought police. The insistence with which Katherine presses her mildly progressive agenda at the elite women's college makes her a kind of academic Erin Brockovich, or so the movie wants us to believe. And in her art history classes, which inspire the screenplay's most intelligent writing, she challenges her students to do more than simply identify paintings shown in slides.
Why is an original van Gogh a work of art and a reproduction not? she asks. And where does a do-it-yourself, paint-by-numbers van Gogh fit into the scheme of things? The early 50's also brought the ascendance of Abstract Expressionism, and the appearance of a Jackson Pollock canvas on campus stirs up ripples of controversy.
But Katherine's biggest boo-boo has nothing to do with notions of aesthetics. Arriving at Wellesley, she is appalled to discover that almost to a person, her brilliant, privileged students have no postgraduate ambitions beyond settling down with Mr. Right, having babies and baking sugar cakes for hubby. Her rebellion culminates with an indignant, heretical slide show of vintage magazine ads displaying perky, smiling Stepford wives reigning like queens in their immaculate kitchens.
The movie, which opens nationally today, was directed by Mike Newell, whose popular films ''Four Weddings and a Funeral'' and ''Enchanted April'' tease you with the same glimmerings of something loftier before settling into a warm and fuzzy niche. Like his fellow Briton Richard Curtis (''Love, Actually,'' ''Bridget Jones's Diary,'' ''Notting Hill'' and the screenplay of ''Four Weddings''), Mr. Newell is master of the feel-good ensemble piece whose shallowness is partly masked by the expertise of a high-toned cast.
A star-watcher's guilty pleasure, the movie rubs together three of Hollywood's brightest younger stars -- Kirsten Dunst, Julia Stiles and Maggie Gyllenhaal, all playing Wellesley seniors -- and throws in an appealing newcomer, Ginnifer Goodwin. Topping off this marshmallow sundae are vivid turns by Marcia Gay Harden as the world's prissiest (and weepiest) teacher of elocution and poise, Juliet Stevenson as the discreetly lesbian school nurse with progressive ideas about birth control, and that empress of hauteur, Marian Seldes, playing the intransigently starchy college president. Dominic West, as a carnivorous-eyed professor of Italian who sleeps with his students, gives the movie its requisite shot of testosterone.
If Ms. Roberts is the undisputed star of ''Mona Lisa Smile,'' she graciously allows her acolytes plenty of opportunity to sparkle. Each plays a specific type. Ms. Dunst is Betty Warren, a vicious, overprivileged alpha girl and archtraditionalist hellbent on marriage to a louse, who attacks Katherine in the college newspaper.
Ms. Stiles is Joan Brandwyn, Betty's best friend and Katherine's protégée, who finds herself torn between marriage and Yale Law School. Ms. Gyllenhaal, who almost steals the movie, plays Giselle Levy, the wised-up class rebel who sleeps around and almost loses her bearings. Ms. Goodwin's character, Connie Baker, is the house wallflower (and chief victim of Betty's cruelty) who can't believe it when a boy asks her out. Although the four are stock figures, the talented actresses shade their stereotypes enough to lend them as much humanity as the formulaic screenplay (by Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal) permits.
As the story follows Katherine through her first year at Wellesley, there are enough reversals to keep you guessing which characters will escape this upscale cuckoo's nest, although it's not very hard to figure out. Although Ms. Roberts is playing a grown-up academic, the aura she wafts is as ingenuous as ever. She is still the wide-eyed but feisty people's princess and angel of common sense whose high-beam smile can melt steel. Think of ''Mona Lisa Smile'' as ''The Best of Everything'' meets ''The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie.'' Or better yet, ''Goodbye, Little Miss Chips.''
''Mona Lisa Smile'' 
~
''Love Don't Cost a Thing,'' proclaims the title of Troy Beyer's film, but affection is a little more expensive. The going rate here is $1,500 for two weeks, which is what Alvin Johnson (Nick Cannon), a geeky high school student, indirectly pays Paris Morgan (Christina Milian), the most popular girl in his Long Beach, Calif., high school class, to pretend to be his girlfriend for two weeks.
Alvin, who wears a circa 1972 Afro and clothes that seem to have been gathered from a Robert Hall sample sale, is an accomplished amateur engineer, a finalist in a national contest sponsored by a car company for a new engine design. But knowing your way around a camshaft doesn't count for much in the buppie environment of Alvin's school, where being a star on the basketball team is the one sure way to attract female attention.
Alvin lures Paris into his debt when she crashes her mother's car, and only Alvin has the technical expertise and the $1,500 in cash needed to make the repairs before Mom gets back from a vacation. Alvin restores the car, and Paris keeps her part of the bargain. She asks Alvin to hang out with her cool friends, takes him shopping for Sean John clothes (a blatant commercial plug) and invites him to parties where his nerd friends are turned away at the door.
Alvin does grow more popular, and Paris, chastened for her snobbery, starts to fall for him. But in his rush to acceptance he has left his old friends behind, a classic movie mistake, since naturally he will need his pals to get him out of the scrape he will inevitably encounter in the final reel of the film, which opens today nationwide.
If all this seems slightly more familiar than usual even for a formula teenage film, it may be because the screenplay (by Michael Swerdlick) had already been used for the 1987 film ''Can't Buy Me Love,'' starring Patrick Dempsey. Ms. Beyer, the director (and sometimes actor, in films that include ''B*A*P*S'' and ''John Q''), has reworked the screenplay with some African-American references, though the material remains essentially unchanged.
Lessons are learned, including the importance of loyalty, the need to see through appearances to essences and the wonder-working properties of blindly believing in yourself. But there are unlearned lessons, too, including the one about the propriety of a teenage girl's entering into a relationship that, whether or not sex is required, amounts to soft-core prostitution.
The cast is uniformly high spirited and attractive, and Ms. Beyer's direction, apart from a few over-weighted Wellesian camera angles, is functional.
''Love Don't Cost a Thing'' has been rated PG-13 (''Parents strongly cautioned''). It contains some saucy dialogue and a cheerleading routine that would steam up glasses on the old 42nd Street.

~
At the start of ''Girl With a Pearl Earring,'' Griet (Scarlett Johansson) is shown peeling an onion, an image as metaphor rarely seen outside first-semester filmmaking classes. The determination visible in such an effort communicates Importance Writ Large. And the film, adapted by Olivia Hetreed from Tracy Chevalier's novel, does have a great subject: the story surrounding an artwork shrouded in mystery and a project that ruins a woman's reputation yet ensures her a place in history.
This film, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is the imagined tale of Griet, a maid who became the muse of Johannes Vermeer and the subject of his painting ''Girl With a Pearl Earring.'' Ms. Johansson is photographed so that her skin is as opalescent as her earring, but the movie is opaque. It is an earnest, obvious melodrama with no soul, filled with the longing silences that come after a sigh.
Yet the care that has gone into making ''Earring,'' a dexterous and absorbing visual re-creation of the lighting and the look that Vermeer achieved in his work, is a tribute to the director Peter Webber's own group of artisans, the cinematographer Eduardo Serra and the production designer Ben van Os. The gorgeous score, by Alexandre Desplat, brushes in a haunted gloom that gives the picture life where none seems to exist. This is the kind of film that would prompt the movie industry trade papers to say ''technical credits above par.''
The teenage Griet is sent off to earn a living because her blind father can no longer support her. The onion she is opening at the story's start is part of the last meal she prepares at home before being shipped off. Her separation anxiety registers so fully throughout the film that it should be listed in the cast of characters as the credits roll. Anxiety permeates the movie like fear of punctures in a Freddy Krueger film. The household that Griet joins is filled with noisy, spoiled children who look down their noses at her. The mistress of the house, Catharina (Essie Davis), is about to add another mouth to the brood.
In addition to her other tasks, Griet is given the duty of cleaning the master's studio, where she develops an interest in the room and its contents. When she asks if she should clean the windows -- that would change the light, she notes -- a befuddled but indifferent mistress tells the maid to do so. Griet's attention to detail has caught the eye of the intense but distracted Vermeer, who is already behind on a commission that is keeping the family fed and clothed.
These commissions are brokered by Vermeer's imperiously practical, and equally proud, mother-in-law (Judy Parfitt), who suggests an art-house version of Frau Blücher from ''Young Frankenstein.'' The figures in his paintings seem to flinch when she speaks.
The jobs she secures for her son-in-law also keep Vermeer in the good graces of van Ruijven (Tom Wilkinson), an acquisitive and unabashed reprobate who also has an eye on Griet. ''You have very wide eyes,'' he admires, turning a compliment into sexual harassment, and Mr. Wilkinson relishes every moment of aggression. His frankly projected appetites make him the only person in the film capable of enjoyment. He loves describing the press of fabric against a woman's skin as if he, too, were caressing it. And as the most fully realized character, he passes that pleasure along to the audience.
With all these assaults on her fluttering, tender sensibility -- and on her time -- it is no wonder that Griet always seems on the verge of tears. One of her few respites comes from the notice of the butcher's thoughtful apprentice, Pieter (Cillian Murphy). But she is far more intrigued by Vermeer, and based on Colin Firth's interpretation it is easy to see why. He plays Vermeer as a taciturn eccentric whose dark eyes house terror, anger and finally appreciation.
He drinks in Griet's understanding of his art. A scene in which he demonstrates the workings of a camera obscura to her -- and their transfixed faces are bathed in its buttery light -- has real emotional power; it is like watching a pair of kids trading secrets under a sheet. And when the painter does talk, he speaks faster and with greater passion than anyone else; words boil out of him. Though Griet drops her head in his presence, her shyness appears disingenuous; she may be the first person ever to be camera-obscura conscious.
''Girl With a Pearl Earring'' is an auspicious feature-directing debut by Mr. Webber in so many ways -- a groaning board of temptations for the eye and ear -- that you may almost forgive the film its lack of drama and the perfunctory attempts at characterization. Viewing this film has been likened to watching paint dry; actually it is more like watching a painting dry.
''Girl With a Pearl Earring'' 
~
Tim Burton -- who made ''Pee-Wee's Big Adventure,'' ''Edward Scissorhands'' and the first two ''Batman'' movies, among others -- is surely one of the most prodigiously imaginative filmmakers around. His best movies glide effortlessly from devilish whimsy to startling perversity, and even when his storytelling falters his inimitably strange visual sensibility leaves its haunting, humorous traces on the memory.
There are, true to form, some startling scenes in his new movie, ''Big Fish'': the hero's arrival in a hamlet called Specter, where the streets are paved with grass and the citizens are always barefoot; his encounter with a witch (Helena Bonham Carter) whose glass eye can reveal the future; his appearance on a campus quadrangle carpeted with daffodils.
The movie also includes, for good measure, a giant named Karl, a squad of circus folk (led by Danny DeVito), a pair of conjoined Korean twins and some menacing, anthropomorphic trees. The theme of ''Big Fish,'' adapted by John August from the novel by Daniel Wallace, is the transforming, sometimes bewildering power of the imagination, which would seem to be a natural subject for Mr. Burton. But the most curious thing about this magical-realist fable, which opens today in New York, Los Angeles and Toronto, is how thin and soft it is, how unpersuasive and ultimately forgettable even its most strenuous inventions turn out to be.
The hero is Edward Bloom, a traveling salesman, who, though he comes from a small town in Alabama, is played as a young man by Ewan McGregor, who is Scottish, and in his later years by Albert Finney, who is English. These two actors (their Southern accents, by the way, are not bad at all) share a robust sense of mischief that overcomes their physical differences. You have no trouble imagining Mr. McGregor mellowing and thickening into Mr. Finney.
Edward, who personifies the bumptious, mythic American life force, is devoted to shading and embellishing the truth. He is an inveterate spinner of what Tom Sawyer, one of his literary ancestors, liked to call stretchers. Edward's oft-repeated, never-verified tall tales, including his signature yarn, the fish story that gives the movie its title, are endlessly charming, except to his son, Will (Billy Crudup), who finds them so exasperating that he stops speaking to his father for several years.
Will is a news-agency reporter in Paris, a suitably empirical profession for the rebellious son of a fabulist father. A phone call summons Will back home to Alabama for a deathbed reconciliation, during which Edward elaborates his fairy-tale biography. In his telling, the usual stations of the life cycle -- departure from home, courtship (of the lovely Alison Lohman, whose character ages gracefully into Jessica Lange), fatherhood, an accidental foray into crime -- become wild episodes in a sprawling picaresque adventure. If only. Even though Will's warmhearted French wife (Marion Cotillard) and his soft-eyed mother (Ms. Lange) hang indulgently on Edward's every word, his stories are so labored, so self-flattering and ultimately so pointless that it is hard not to feel some sympathy for Will, who grew up in his father's shadow and, for much of his childhood, in his absence.
From time to time, a glimmer of real drama shines through all the twinkly sentiment. The conflict between father and son is the most, perhaps the only, believable element in the story, but the movie is so thoroughly bewitched by Edward that it makes Will look like a cold fish who stubbornly refuses to accept his father for what he is. At one point, Edward's doctor (Robert Guillaume) suggests that Edward's stories are preferable to the banal facts of ordinary life. Wouldn't Will prefer to believe that, on the day of his birth, his dad was subduing a legendary catfish rather than selling household gadgets in Wichita?
The movie insists that the only possible answer is yes, and thus chooses maudlin moonshine over engagement with the difficulties of real life, which is exactly the choice Edward has made. Its vision of America, of the South in particular, during the last four decades or so has been scrubbed clean of any social or political messiness, much as the life of the Bloom family, notwithstanding Will's poutiness, has been burnished to a warm, happy glow. In their eagerness to celebrate Edward's grand spirit, the filmmakers wind up diminishing it, declining to explore the causes or the costs of his addiction to fantasy.
In the past Mr. Burton's images have had a touch of the uncanny, as though they were windows onto the scary, marvelous landscape of the unconscious. ''Big Fish'' lacks the resonance of his earlier work partly because this time the bright, antic inventions are a form of denial. The film insists on viewing its hero as an affectionate, irrepressible raconteur. From where I sat, he looked more like an incorrigible narcissist and also, perhaps, a compulsive liar, whose love for others is little more than overflowing self-infatuation. But all this might be forgivable -- everyone else in the picture thinks so -- if Edward were not also a bit of a bore.
''Big Fish'' 
~
Before striking out for the hills of Anatolia near the end, ''Monsieur Ibrahim,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, confines its attention to the Rue Bleue, a narrow, slightly shabby street in a working-class section of Paris. Adapted from Eric-Emmanuel Schmitt's novel (which was also made into a play), this modest, sentimental film looks nostalgically back on Paris in the mid-1960's and casts a loving, oblique glance at the French movies of that era.
At one point, Brigitte Bardot herself (played by a latter-day cinema sex goddess, Isabelle Adjani) shows up to shoot a few scenes on the Rue Bleue, where she wins the envious admiration of the local prostitutes. For its part, ''Monsieur Ibrahim,'' written and directed by François Dupeyron, has a decidedly New Wave look and feel, with street-level, hand-held cameras and bursts of French and English pop music on the soundtrack (including, as it happens, Richard Anthony singing the praises of the New Wave in ''Nouvelle Vague'').
Much of the music issues from a radio belonging to Momo (Pierre Boulanger), a Jewish teenager who lives in a state of low-intensity domestic war with his cold, depressive father (Gilbert Melki). In search of affection, and eager to grow up, Momo, at the start of the film, breaks open his piggy bank to purchase the services of a prostitute named Sylvie (Anne Suarez). While she and her colleagues function, in classic French-movie fashion, as both lovers and surrogate mothers, Momo also finds a second father in the person of Ibrahim (Omar Sharif), who keeps a small grocery store across the street from Momo's apartment.
The story of their cross-generational, cross-cultural friendship is introduced by an anthem to universal brotherhood (one of the musical specialties of those days) called ''Why Can't We Live Together.'' The question has hardly lost its pertinence, and Mr. Dupeyron, without overt didacticism, turns the story of an elderly Muslim and his young Jewish protégé into a parable of tolerance and understanding.
The two central performances help the lesson go down easily, and Mr. Duperyon's unassuming, slightly ragged realism gives the movie a sweet, lived-in charm. Mr. Sharif, grizzled and white-haired at 71, has lost none of the charisma that made him an international movie star in the 1960's, and Mr. Boulanger, in his first feature film, shows impressive self-assurance. Mr. Sharif's character is, in some ways, a dubious conceit; he is the selfless repository of exotic Eastern wisdom whose main purpose in life is to shepherd his young friend through life's difficulties. In a Hollywood melodrama, Ibrahim would most likely be a spiritually gifted black man. But Mr. Sharif is a wry and subtle actor, and he gives the cliché some humor and life.
''Monsieur Ibrahim'' 
~
There is probably no director more obsessed with the complexity of patriotism -- an unusual subject to plumb in mainstream films -- than Edward Zwick, who is driven to question the imperatives of an America that his protagonists both love and detest. His latest movie, ''The Last Samurai,'' falls squarely into the realm of the previous Zwick bedeviled-hero films, ''Glory,'' ''Courage Under Fire'' and ''The Siege.''
And I do mean squarely. ''Samurai'' is a mythic western that combines a fish-out-of-water theme with an immersion in Japanese culture: John Ford's ''Lost in Translation.'' It depicts phalanxes of troops moving with deliberate, terrifying fervor across the very wide screen.
And this time Tom Cruise, the can-do idol of millions, uses his polished-chrome smile mirthlessly. At least for the first hour, his grin looks like a faded tattoo. The uneven ''Samurai'' is a can-do movie that's far more effective at communicating emotion in bigger scenes than in more intimate ones.
Mr. Cruise plays Nathan Algren, a burned-out former Army officer and Indian fighter. Having survived Custer's Last Stand in 1876, he is now a commercial sideshow prop, demonstrating the newest Winchester rifle. As Algren lumbers through the clichés he's hired to recite before blasting away at targets -- though the whiskey oozing from his pores probably makes him more of a danger than the weapon -- a sudden ember of regret flames in this ex-soldier's eyes. He goes off the script, reciting the horrors of a campaign in which he and his troops slaughtered innocents.
Algren looks so wasted and beleaguered that the biggest question is not whether he'll wing an audience member with a stray shot, but whether he can bear up under the dense, cast-iron plot. After being bounced by the Winchester folks, Algren is hired by his former commander, Colonel Bagley (Tony Goldwyn, playing a salamanderlike ancestor of all the sleazy characters he's ever portrayed). Bagley wants Algren to travel with him to Tokyo and train Japanese soldiers in the use of American tactics and rifles. The Meiji emperor is ready to accept the ways of the West; he's actually being pressured to by American business interests.
Once in Japan, Algren is forced to send his nervous, underprepared imperial troops into battle too soon against an enemy of the emperor, the samurai Katsumoto (Ken Watanabe). Despite the imperial army's modern weapons, Katsumoto and his men sweep in with ferocity and wield their arms of the past -- swords and spears -- with lethal effectiveness. The cinematographer, John Toll, films their arrival through a thick fog in a forest, as if Katsumoto's men were ghosts from the recent past out to rob Algren's troops of their backbones -- and their lives.
In their ritual armor, Katsumoto's men make quick work of their foes; there's tragicomic relief as Algren's conscripted farmers tremble while trying to load their guns. When a wounded Algren kills Katsumoto's second in command, he's captured by the invaders and, even more bewildering, cared for by Katsumoto's sister, Taka (Koyuki), the widow of the man Algren murdered.
It's a complicated story, and Mr. Zwick is complicated, too: he loves arrogance slapped out of its self-regard. Algren is full of himself, even though he's conceived as a man who was second tenor to a legend; he knew and despised Custer. Looking fashionably distressed, with slightly puffy, red-rimmed eyes that at the very least suggest that he's survived a grueling press junket, Mr. Cruise has a worn cockiness. His aw-shucks virility is a little wilted, if not mildewed, around the edges: a kind of reverse narcissism, since Algren is proud of his dissolution (though Mr. Cruise's good-boy posture works for a man reared under the disciplinary rigors of the military).
Although at times Mr. Cruise comes off as too contemporary for the 19th century -- at one point, he seems to be waiting for a cellphone call to confirm his terms for a cover of Details magazine -- this displacement fits better when he becomes a prisoner. Algren appears to be reacting to this strange new world through sounds; nothing he's hearing makes any sense to him. He's a mangy gaijin that Edgar Rice Burroughs might have invented, though James Clavell got there eventually.
The film includes notable performances by actors not drafted to shoulder the burden of the entire production. Billy Connolly, emanating a gamy, sly menace that he's rarely suggested before, plays Algren's former sergeant at arms, Zebulon Gant. Gant, used to propping up his old friend and superior officer, joins Algren in the journey to Japan. Mr. Connolly's loose, hostile vivacity registers so clearly that it's obvious we won't be seeing very much of him. But this is crackling, rigorous comic work; he doesn't have to present the face of tragedy.
The far more weighted and daring acting comes from Mr. Watanabe, as Katsumoto. Probably best known outside of Japan as the reedy, restless sidekick in the gourmand classic ''Tampopo,'' Mr. Watanabe has filled out physically and spiritually. The formality he brings to Katsumoto is hard-won, especially when he's having pointedly thoughtful conversations with Algren that sound more like translations of ideograms than actual dialogue.
The film never really explains how or why this resolute, isolated samurai learned to speak English better than the emperor. His fluency doesn't quite make sense, though it gives the movie some needed mystique. It plays better than the inexorable pull of romance, drawing Taka and Algren together.
''The Last Samurai,'' which Mr. Zwick and Marshall Herskovitz wrote with John Logan, from a story by Mr. Logan, super-glues together a host of contradictions. Unfortunately, as dramatized, they function as conventions that are older than the story the film is weaving. The movie, which opens nationwide today, is most watchable during the majestic brutality of the battle sequences. This is not only because of the handsome staging, but also because the keywords sacrifice and honor are evoked with verve and simplicity, more so than in the ''exchange of idea'' chats between Algren and Katsumoto, which sound like statements being read into the Congressional Record by Nathaniel Hawthorne.
Mr. Zwick has absorbed the lethal agility of Akira Kurosawa; what registers just as powerfully as the sureness of the combatants is the ugly futility of the battles themselves. When the film sets up the lessons that Algren has to learn, the hero is not really a fish out of water; he's more like a big fish in a dry pond, picking up a lesson in Eastern deportment and philosophy a step away from the ''wax-on, wax-off'' curriculum of ''The Karate Kid.'' In those scenes presaging his Eastern conversion, Algren can't suppress his eagerness to learn, picking up the ways of the sword and the Samurai code of Bushido with an alacrity that's mandated for movie stars: flash-card education.
The film's title evokes James Fenimore Cooper, though he had enough perspective not to make a white man ''the last'' in his novel. Even though ''The Last Samurai'' opts for Japan's cultural differences, all of the unmentioned hardships of a feudal society notwithstanding, the remaining honorable native here is an American. Is that a veiled way of saying that Japan's old ways were doomed after all?
''The Last Samurai'' 
~
''Honey,'' an upbeat little hip-hop fable that opens today nationwide, is not the kind of movie that will impress anyone with its originality. It may remind you, at various times, of ''Flashdance,'' ''Fame,'' ''8 Mile'' and ''Drumline,'' a list that could be expanded to include dozens of other movies about plucky young artists striving to make it big while remaining true to themselves and connected to the people around them. In this case the heroine is a cheerful, driven young dancer named Honey Daniels (Jessica Alba), who longs to break out of the hip-hop club scene into the world of music videos (from which the movie's director, Bille Woodruff, has emerged to make his feature-film debut).
Honey's path is strewn with some familiar impediments, including a disapproving mother (Lonette McKee) who thinks her daughter's talents would be better suited to ballet, and a video director (David Moscow) whose interest in Honey may extend beyond those talents. But the movie is as sunny and high-spirited as Honey herself, and you don't worry too hard or too long about her or anyone else in it.
Her ambition is balanced by civic-mindedness, and her self-confidence never gets the better of her easy generosity. In addition to bartending and working the cash register at a record store, she teaches hip-hop dancing at a community center in her Bronx neighborhood and tries to steer her young protégés -- in particular a troubled, gifted young man named Benny (Lil' Romeo, who shows some real promise as an actor) -- away from the clutches of the local drug dealer.
Her ally and love interest is Chaz (Mekhi Phifer), a handsome barber who represents -- as Ice Cube did in ''Barbershop'' -- the values of hard work and community responsibility. While Chaz has no serious rival for Honey's affections (though she plays hard-to-get for a while), the movie does hint at a conflict between those values and the shallow, seductive glitter of show business. But Ms. Alba, lithe and charming though she is, is also too blandly perky to register much in the way of emotional conflict. And the script, by Alonzo Brown and Kim Watson, while heavy on incident and superficial complication, shies away from anything like real drama.
What the movie offers instead -- in addition to frequent shots of Ms. Alba's bellybutton -- is a soundtrack bursting with well-chosen beats and a few cameos by real rap stars, including Jadakiss, Ginuwine and Missy Elliott. (Ms. Elliott surely deserves a movie of her own.) The kinetic energy of the music keeps this picture moving, and the presence of these stars gives it glamour and credibility, which, to fans like Honey and her friends, amount to the same thing.
The ease with which Honey moves between the streets of the Bronx and the glittering whirl of the music industry reflects the current self-image of hip-hop itself, with its aggressive celebration of upward mobility and its simultaneous embrace of democratic, street-level authenticity. ''Honey'' brings out the wholesome, affirmative side of the hip-hop aesthetic without being overly preachy, and it offers a winningly utopian view of show-business success without real costs or compromises.
''Honey'' 
~
Apparently the only thing tougher than endurance on the frontier is sitting through a movie about endurance on the frontier -- at least that is the point ''The Missing'' seems determined to make. Amazingly, what it also seems to be saying is that nearly 50 years after John Ford's ''Searchers'' we have arrived at a point in film history when the movie industry can offer a less sophisticated version of the same material.
Overly sensitive and disdainful of her tough life, Lilly (Evan Rachel Wood) longs to escape the grim cabin she shares with her healer mother, Maggie (Cate Blanchett), and little sister, Dot (Jenna Boyd), in New Mexico territory in the 1880's. But teenage Lilly gets away from home in a way she never bargained for: she is kidnapped by renegade Apaches who plan to sell her into slavery once they enter Mexico.
And she suffers. Lilly is subjected to everything but a Senate confirmation hearing and an appearance on ''The O'Reilly Factor.'' But ''The Missing'' mutes the sexual paranoia that jerked John Wayne's face into a grimace in ''The Searchers,'' in which he was eaten alive by the possibility that his abducted niece had become involved with her captor. Despite torrents of brutality, much of it coming after Lilly's botched escape attempts, there is no danger of rape from the scrupulous villains in ''The Missing.'' (The kidnappers may be more naïve than their victims.) As a result this is a movie that exists only from the shoulders up. Just before Lilly is snatched away, Maggie's estranged father, Samuel Jones (Tommy Lee Jones), returns home, and there's already tension between Lilly and Maggie. The abduction forces Maggie to team with the father she reviles because she needs his help to track down Lilly. This situation is an intriguing way for the director, Ron Howard, to play to his chief strength and interests: the knotty and peculiar emotional crosscurrents that buffet families.
This feels like a thoughtful attempt to give the depiction of home life some weight, a quality not evident in Mr. Howard's previous work. The steeliness that links Maggie, her father and Lilly are evident in their stubbornness and inability to communicate their simplest needs. The first 20 minutes or so of prologue provide a bare-bones melodrama unleavened by sentimentality, as the equally willful presences of Ms. Blanchett and Mr. Jones square off against each other. (There is a suggestion of sexual violence in Maggie's past after her father abandoned the family, though it is mentioned only briefly.)
After the mission of ''The Missing'' begins, though, the movie starts to feel like Stephen King's ''Little House on the Prairie.'' The kidnappers' ringleader, the horribly scarred Chidin (Eric Schweig), is a cross-cultural menace: a brujo as adept at casting evil spells as he is at keeping his filthy band of brothers in line.
His cruelty, which peaks in a horrifying scene that shows Lilly what her enslaved future holds, is explained in a bizarre subplot about freebooter American soldiers looting the home of slaughtered settlers. It threatens to offer political explanations for Chidin's rampage, but really only serves to extend the running time of the picture. (This section does feature a welcome appearance by Val Kilmer as a useless martinet Army officer.)
As do a number of other movies this season, ''The Missing'' uses the power of mysticism to add a level of psychological import. But it seems only reminiscent of the austere nature-spirituality of ''The Last of the Mohicans'' and eventually provides just a flirtation with magic, which is a respite from the more salient plot points.
Maggie and her father come to understand and respect each other, and eventually the bleakly beautiful cinematography rendered by Salvatore Totino blossoms into dappled sunlight, something John Ford would never have sunk to. Well, not that often, anyway.
Mr. Howard's restlessness as a director is muted by his need to spell things out while bringing them to a rousing and well-manicured close. That worked to his advantage in ''Apollo 13,'' in which concentration, ambition and corniness meshed. But here, despite the performances he gets -- the young Ms. Boyd is as good and determined as the adults -- he seems to have something else on his mind, perhaps remembering ''The Alamo'' project he never got to make.
''The Missing'' 
~
The Disney fright comedy ''The Haunted Mansion,'' starring Eddie Murphy in another of his put-upon dad roles, is an anomaly: no frights and no laughs. The price of the popcorn-and-drink combo at most theaters showing this film is scarier.
Given its rejection of conventional staples like laughs or scares, ''Haunted Mansion'' is almost like a bit of Zen wisdom: When you can snatch the entertainment from my movie, grasshopper, it is time for you to leave. The director, Rob Minkoff, should do that, in another picture ground from a Disney theme-park attraction. It's clearly only a matter of time before ''Parking Lot: The Movie'' and ''People-Mover: The Motion Picture.'' Who's to say these films would not be more diverting than ''Mansion,'' which exists primarily to make ''Cat in the Hat'' seem a piece of beveled nuance by comparison.
''Haunted Mansion'' does seem beveled, actually; about all it has going for it is John Myhre's production design and all the work that went into creating the title ''character,'' which is as expressive as most of the cast is allowed to be. The mansion, Gracey Manor, is occupied by a ghost, Edward Gracey (Nathaniel Parker), who killed himself centuries ago in response to his lady love's suicide.
Jim Evers (Mr. Murphy), a real estate agent, is summoned to the manor with his wife, Sara (Marsha Thomason); tough-girl daughter, Megan (Aree Davis); and arachnophobic son, Michael (Marc John Jefferies). And the breathtaking Sara has an amazing resemblance to the late lady of the manor; or, as Jim puts it, a ghost is trying to get jiggy with his wife.
Mr. Murphy's current core audience -- the 4-to-11-year-olds taking a break from ''Even Stevens'' on television long enough to get to a theater -- was amused by such lines at the weekend screening I attended. The adults sat without responding for so long that I think they forgot why they were there.
They may have gone because Mr. Murphy still has such audience rapport that he can create expectations, and he retains the reflexes of an entertainer. ''Mansion'' provides a reminder of those gifts, since it reteams Mr. Murphy with Terence Stamp, his co-star in the often funny ''Bowfinger.'' And since another Disney theme-park-attraction-turned-movie, ''Pirates of the Caribbean,'' defied expectation and turned out to be so surprisingly good, this film promised possibilities.
But it is finally a movie that doesn't really want to evoke reaction; it lacks even the cheesy fear quotient that a movie like ''Abbott and Costello Meet the Mummy'' could dredge up. And Mr. Murphy is left to fall back on his mechanical sketch version of displaying terror, which only makes the picture seem even more insubstantial. As special guest apparitions, Wallace Shawn and Jennifer Tilly get a few chuckles, mostly by using their standard inflections to deliver the nonsensical lines.
''Haunted Mansion'' does pose a few interesting philosophical questions: queries from the beyond, so to speak. For instance, do the gorgeous and talented African-American actresses, in seemingly inexhaustible supply, who are employed to shake their heads and frown as Mr. Murphy's wives, get upset because there isn't much else for them to do in the movies these days? Does Mr. Murphy wonder if there's a middle ground between family comedies and the forgettable action fare like ''Showtime'' and ''I Spy'' for him to parade his considerable talents?
There's plenty of time to ponder such mysteries while watching ''Haunted Mansion,'' the film equivalent of the dark, boring period on a haunted house ride before the gondola crashes into another room filled with dirty mirrors.
''Haunted Mansion'' 
~
In ''The Cooler'' William H. Macy plays Bernie Lootz, a man who is not just prodigiously unlucky but also the cause of unluckiness in others. He is employed by a Las Vegas casino owner named Shelly (Alec Baldwin) to terminate the winning streaks of customers with too much good fortune, something he can do merely by showing his sad-sack face at a hot blackjack table or slot machine.
The setting of ''The Cooler,'' the first feature directed by Wayne Kramer, is a little tired, and the premise is pretty hokey. Mr. Kramer, rather than trying to discover anything new, is content to recycle familiar characters and story lines.
The script (written by him and Frank Hannah) and the direction are skillful, if occasionally gimmicky, but you can't help thinking back on many other small-scale film-noir updates from the past decade or so that have taken similar advantage of the lurid neon atmosphere of Las Vegas and the ready-made themes of ruin and redemption that city seems to offer. Luckily this picture is rescued from cliché by the quality of the acting, and Mr. Kramer wisely gives the actors room to work.
Bernie, with his bad haircut, decent suits and hangdog smile, is clearly resigned to the short end of the stick. He lives in a drab motel room from which his pet cat has fled, and when he sits down at the casino bar for a cup of coffee, the cream pitcher is always empty.
Bernie's luck starts to change when he meets Natalie (Maria Bello), a cocktail waitress who seduces him and sticks around even when their first sexual encounter ends (for her at least) somewhat short of satisfaction. ''Don't worry, I've had worse,'' she tells him when he tries to apologize.
Suddenly a life that had seemed too bad to be believed feels too good to be true, and the dramatic core of the movie is Bernie's teetering tightrope walk between deliverance and calamity.
His long-lost, ill-mannered son (Shawn Hatosy) blows into town with a pregnant wife (Estrella Warren) and a carload of petty scams and transparent guilt trips. Shelly, meanwhile, determined to maintain his casino, the Shangri-La, as an oasis of old-fashioned ''classy'' sleaze, is fighting the efforts of his partners to make it slicker and more family friendly. Bernie, a little slow on the uptake and eager to be fooled, doesn't recognize the threats to his fragile happiness until it's almost too late.
Shelly is both a brute and a sentimentalist, and Mr. Baldwin swivels elegantly from viciousness to self-pity, from utter rottenness to something that might be mistaken for nobility.
Mr. Macy, as he did in ''Panic,'' another modest, proficient, not entirely original exercise in lowlife humanism (in which he played a sensitive hit man), makes his character both sympathetic and believable. Bernie may be hapless and defeated, but he holds on to enough dignity to keep from being a complete sap, and his instinctive decency is never inflated into sainthood.
There is a slyness about this loser that makes him intriguing as well as pitiable, and Natalie's deepening affection for him, which might have tested the audience's skepticism, is wonderfully credible. Ms. Bello, in spite of a shaky tough-girl accent, is warm and real, words which might also describe the sex scenes between her and Mr. Macy.
These are explicit, but also awkward and funny, and the actors gamely remove their vanity along with their clothes. Theirs are not sculptured movie-star bodies -- there are some sags and creases on display -- but this makes the characters seem more real and makes their interaction sexier than the usual movie-star panting and grappling.
''The Cooler'' 
~
The clumsy, wooden, screen adaptation of Michael Crichton's novel ''Timeline'' suggests a particularly wretched episode of ''Star Trek'' tricked out with fancy fireworks and weighed down with a score that grinds away like a cement mixer. The pyrotechnics, in which battling 14th-century soldiers catapult fireballs into each other's fortresses, may be diverting. But from the beginning, this fantasy of time travel, in which a group of contemporary archaeologists plunges through a wormhole in the time-space continuum to land in France in 1357, pounds you over the head with its noisy, ridiculous notions of medieval life.
The movie, directed by Richard Donner, is so verbally stingy it feels as though it were written with a stopwatch. But that doesn't prevent it from lumbering on for just under two nearly intolerable hours. Now and then the interminable battles are suspended just long enough -- usually less than five seconds -- to shoehorn in a carefully staged, unsteamy smooch between one of the movie's two pairs of cardboard lovebirds.
The more unlikely romance, between Andre (Gerard Butler), a bearded Scottish archaeologist and Lady Clare (Anna Friel), a 14th-century French aristocrat menaced by English soldiers, begins with the usual questions -- ''Are you married?'' ''No.'' ''Well, then are you 'with' anyone?'' -- and proceeds in a matter of minutes to snuggly commitment. Andre eventually has to make the ultimate Captain Kirk-worthy choice of remaining with his lady love in 1357 or returning to the 21st century.
The other romance teams Chris (Paul Walker), the son of Professor Johnston (Billy Connolly), the chief archaeologist, with his dad's attractive, gung-ho protégé Kate (Frances O'Connor). With his pretty-boy face and talent-free acting, Mr. Walker, who became a star with ''The Fast and the Furious,'' resembles a throwback to the days when imitation Tab Hunters were tapped for potential stardom simply on the basis of their dimpled smiles and vacant, sparkly eyes.
The demented brain behind the time machine, which can ''fax'' objects from one place to another and one time to another belongs to a ruthless scientist named Doniger (David Thewlis) who is determined to make history no matter the consequences. His treacherous spin doctor, Frank (Neal McDonough), is a glowering piece of duplicitous yuppie scum. The expedition is dispatched to retrieve the professor, who got stuck in the past.
Unbeknownst to the travelers the device has not been perfected, and the chances of the party's safe return are dicey. Because ''Timeline,'' which opens nationally today, doesn't have a genuinely human moment, the travelers' fates are a matter of indifference.
''Timeline'' 
~
In ''Gothika,'' a clammy new thriller that opens nationwide today, Halle Berry plays Miranda Grey, a psychiatrist at a Connecticut institution for the criminally insane. One of her patients is Chlöe (Penélope Cruz), a disheveled young woman who screeches and rants and claims that she is being sexually assaulted by the devil in her locked cell. One obvious symptom of Chlöe's illness, whatever it is, is a tendency to speak in lurid similes: ''He opened me up like a flower of pain,'' she says of her demonic attacker, and (about someone else), ''I sliced his adam's apple in half like a piece of fruit on a summer day.''
In that spirit you might say that this movie, directed by Mathieu Kassovitz from a script by Sebastian Gutierrez, is like a plastic houseplant that has been given too much water, or a wax apple that someone has tried to bake in a pie. It is a thoroughly synthetic confection, compounded of clichés drawn from a half-dozen genres and subgenres that for a while might almost persuade its audience, as it apparently convinced its makers, that it is something more.
In the end, though, as the ghost-story clichés collide with the serial-killer clichés, and the women-behind-bars clichés give way to the wronged-women-seeking revenge clichés, the movie proves to be both too much and not enough: yet another slick, empty package of ersatz entertainment.
After her frustrating session with Chlöe, Miranda saunters through the rest of her workday, oblivious to the sinister foreshadowings all around her. Mr. Gutierrez seems to have gotten some script advice from either Edward Bulwer-Lytton or Snoopy, since it is (perpetually) a dark and stormy night. The gloomy corridors of the Woodward correctional center are bathed in pale, bluish fluorescence, and the power is always on the verge of going out.
Mr. Kassovitz and Matthew Libatique, the cinematographer, do an effective (if not terribly original) job of creating an atmosphere of dread, though the director is a little too fond of making the audience jump at nothing. The false scares are so numerous -- an umbrella popping open, a light going out, a barn owl flapping into the frame -- that after a while they diminish the impact of the really scary stuff, rather than heightening it.
Still, for a while, ''Gothika'' will manage to quicken your pulse and keep you in a state of nervous anticipation. Driving home through torrential rain, Miranda sees a girl standing in the middle of the road. When Miranda tries to help her, the girl chatters and screams and then bursts into flame. The doctor awakens a few days later to find that she has become an inmate, having been locked up for murdering her husband (Charles S. Dutton) -- who was also the director of the hospital -- with an ax, a crime she initially has no memory of committing.
Her sort of kindly, sort of creepy therapist is Pete Graham (Robert Downey Jr.), a former colleague who had a crush on her and who now either wants to help her or is part of a conspiracy to drive her completely out of her mind.
''I'm not deluded,'' Miranda insists, ''I'm possessed.'' The flaming girl continues to pursue her in that passive-aggressive way common to movie ghosts in the post-''Sixth Sense'' era, driven by an urgent need to communicate something and able to do so only by depositing maddeningly cryptic clues. The supernatural visitor writes the words ''Not Alone'' on fogged-up glass, in blood and, gruesomely, in the flesh of Miranda's arm. What she means is ''I was the victim of a homicidal maniac, and I need you to help me uncover his horrible crimes,'' but she lacks either the space or the spelling ability to say so outright.
And I certainly will not spell out for you what you will, before too long, figure out for yourself, at which point all suspense and intrigue will evaporate. About two-thirds of the way through the screening I attended, the startled gasps were replaced by laughter, as ''Gothika'' began its headlong descent into incoherence. If I had left after an hour, I might have taken the film for a clever, if somewhat glib, exercise in terror, with Ms. Berry showing the appropriate mixture of helplessness and grit, and Mr. Downey adding a gleam of raffish intelligence. But of course I would have been deluded.
''Gothika'' 
~
''Tupac: Resurrection,'' which opens nationwide today, is a documentary with a curious, uncanny twist: it seems to be narrated, from beyond the grave, by its subject, the actor and rap star Tupac Shakur, who was shot to death at a Las Vegas intersection in 1996. ''I got shot,'' Shakur's voice-over says as clouds roll across the screen. ''I'm surprised but I'm happy.''
Of course, he can be referring only to an earlier incident in which he took several bullets in the lobby of a Manhattan office building, but the film, deftly constructed out of archival materials by Lauren Lazin, fosters the illusion that he is reflecting on his own murder. This is part of Ms. Lazin's daring, slightly creepy overall strategy, which is to create the impression that ''Resurrection'' is not so much a biography as a posthumous memoir.
''What is so bad about death?'' Shakur wonders, and you can't help but think that he poses this rhetorical question with the authority of someone who knows what he's talking about.
It may be cynical to say it, but in purely commercial terms death has been very good to Shakur, or at least to his record label. According to the film's publicity materials, he has sold more than 33.5 million albums, making him the best-selling rap artist of all time. Around 30 million of those discs have been purchased since his murder, during which time at least half a dozen new albums have been released, not all of them greatest hits compilations, all of them certified platinum.
The release of ''Tupac: Resurrection'' will surely increase his visibility, which is clearly the point. It is less an exploration of his importance in contemporary popular culture than an affirmation of it. Rather than investigate the circumstances leading up to Shakur's death -- as Nick Broomfield did last year in his probing, borderline-reckless documentary ''Biggie and Tupac'' -- Ms. Lazin uses video clips, interviews, still photographs and handwritten lyrics to give Shakur the chance to reflect on his short, dramatic and remarkably productive life. ''This is my story,'' he says. ''Ambition, redemption, violence and love.''
Having begun with his death, ''Resurrection'' circles back to Shakur's beginnings. His mother, Afeni Shakur (an executive producer of the movie), was one of the highest-ranking women in the Black Panther Party; while pregnant with him she was jailed on charges of conspiracy that were later dismissed. His militant inheritance would show up in his lyrics, as would the tension -- handed down from the Panthers to any number of politicized hip-hop artists -- between the romance of violence and the urge toward more positive, constructive ways of addressing the social problems facing black Americans.
''Resurrection'' presents him as a charismatic, contradictory figure, and it revisits the controversies -- some lurid, some contrived, some violent -- that swirled around hip-hop as it took on a harder, more violent edge in the late 80's and early 90's. Shakur, an open-hearted young man who attended a prestigious performing-arts high school in Baltimore (the actress Jada Pinkett Smith was a classmate), seems in some ways an unlikely target for the hysteria of anti-hip-hop scolds like C. Delores Tucker and William Bennett. His love of Shakespeare is at least as convincing as Mr. Bennett's, and his musical influences included Frank Sinatra and the soft-rock troubadour Don McLean.
Of course, the literary and cultural sophistication of rap have long been underestimated, in part because promoters of anti-pop-culture hysteria rarely actually listen to the music they deplore, and in part because so many rappers value the pose of street-tough masculine hardness over the display of sensitivity or intelligence.
In the interviews sampled at length in ''Resurrection'' -- in the studio, on the Venice Beach Boardwalk, at the Clinton Correctional Facility where he served time after being convicted of sexual abuse in 1994 -- Shakur comes across as funny, sensitive and insightful. His soft brown eyes and easy smile make the strutting thug he sometimes played in his videos and on the evening news seem like a knowing, calculated performance -- less persuasive, perhaps, than the ones he gave in movies like ''Poetic Justice'' and ''Juice.''
Above all, he seems to have been overwhelmed by fame and unable, once he had attained it, to rein in his wilder impulses. Clips from local news programs revisit his many legal troubles: a lawsuit against the Oakland police, a fight that led to a 15-day jail sentence, the sexual abuse trial that was interrupted by his first shooting.
Through it all Shakur, even at his angriest, retains the sweet-natured, exuberant optimism that may be the deepest source of his durable appeal. We see him clowning around backstage, bantering with Tabitha Soren of MTV news, and trying to articulate his ''Thug Life'' philosophy at a political conference in Indianapolis.
Ms. Lazin succeeds in conjuring his presence and in showing how smart and likable he could be, but the film's perspective is frustratingly limited. Shakur was embroiled -- some think fatally -- in the feud between East and West Coast rappers and also between the rival hip-hop impresarios Suge (Marion Knight) and P. Diddy (Sean Combs), but those strange and troubling dramas remain unexplained.
And it might have been worthwhile to include some voices besides Shakur's -- fellow rappers, rivals and collaborators, a few of the countless intellectuals who have expounded on the meaning of his life and work. Artists are rarely their own best interpreters, and celebrities can often be blind to the implications of the images they project.
But in the end, as its title suggests, ''Tupac: Resurrection'' is less concerned with analyzing Shakur than with bringing him back to life, for which his fans can only be grateful. For everyone else, this film provides an affecting, partial portrait -- you might even say the self-portrait -- of a talented young man (he was 25 when he died) whose fate was to be misunderstood, perhaps most tragically by himself.
''Tupac: Resurrection'' 
~
''Looney Tunes: Back in Action,'' a frantically paced, densely populated farce in which beloved cartoon characters interact with Hollywood stars, cheerfully describes itself as a smackdown between those long-running rivals Bugs Bunny and Daffy Duck. But the real smackdown pits Warner Brothers' stable of animated characters, some of which date back more than 70 years, against mild-mannered actors like Brendan Fraser and Jenna Elfman.
It is no contest: the animated characters come out on top. Because the actors have to adjust their rhythms to perform in a movie that has the breathless momentum of a Saturday morning cartoon, they're at a severe disadvantage. Only Steve Martin, as the Dr. Evil-like Mr. Chairman, who runs the monstrous Acme Corporation, begins to match his animated adversaries in flair. And even then, you have the uneasy feeling that Mr. Martin is straining to parody Mike Myers.
Animated characters, of course, have every advantage over humans. They move at the speed of light, have more sharply defined personalities, and are ageless and indestructible. No matter how often Daffy is smashed flat as a pancake (and it happens with pleasing regularity), he rises up seconds later, as noisy and frenetic as ever. And who could compete with Bugs Bunny, the unshakeably cocky, carrot-munching rabbit who talks in the smoothed-out argot of a 30's Hollywood gangster? Not even Daffy Duck, it turns out. Simply by flashing his buck-toothed grin, Bugs steals every scene in which he appears.
If the movie, which opens nationally today, has loads of nerve, its ambitious fusion of cartoons and live-action comedy is only fitfully amusing. At every turn, you can sense the director Joe Dante's jitters as he packs more and more extraneous stuff into each scene. And the density of jokes and references piled into Larry Doyle's screenplay smacks of nervous overkill.
The Looney Tunes cartoon shorts have never been known for their concentrated attention spans, and that looniness is one of their charms. Stretched out to 90 minutes, a movie that relies on sheer dizzying speed to camouflage its inconsistency can be exhausting to watch.
Although the movie has a plot, that story is half-smothered under the tonnage of pop trivia. Daffy and Bugs are two feuding contract players for Warner Brothers Pictures. When Daffy is booted out of the studio by its jargon-spouting vice president of comedy, Kate Houghton (Ms. Elfman), and a security guard, D. J. Drake (Mr. Fraser) who dreams of being a stuntman, is summoned to escort him off the lot.
Daffy forces himself into D. J.'s life, and they go on a search for D. J.'s father, Damian (Timothy Dalton), an international superstar who, in addition to playing a James Bond-like spy, happens to be a real-life intelligence agent. Damian is searching for the much-coveted Blue Monkey Diamond, a legendary bauble with the power to turn people into monkeys. The Chairman also covets the diamond, which would enable him to rule the planet by turning everyone else into monkeys.
The search, in which the pair are joined by Kate and Bugs, takes them to Las Vegas where they meet up with Dusty Tails (a wan, charisma-free Heather Locklear), an undercover operative posing as a showgirl. From there they head to Paris, where they frolic at the Louvre and the Eiffel Tower; then it's on to Africa.
''Looney Tunes'' is so jam-packed with pop cultural references that it may be Hollywood's ultimate example to date of a movie cannibalizing movie lore. The James Bond, Austin Powers, ''Star Wars,'' ''Mission: Impossible'' and ''Mummy'' franchises are all heavily raided. One could fill a page with these and other references that fly by, from ''Viva Las Vegas'' to ''The Manchurian Candidate'' to ''Finding Nemo'' to ''Psycho.'' By the end of the movie virtually the entire stable of Looney Tunes characters, including Porky Pig, Yosemite Sam, Wile E. Coyote, the Tasmanian Devil, and Marvin the Martian, have put in appearances.
Not all the humor is intended for children. The opening scenes include some broad jokes at the movie industry's expense. Later on, a desert scene in which a Wal-Mart store appears as a flickering mirage prompts Bugs to trumpet the blatant product placement.
But when this mad dash of a movie pauses to catch its breath, it has a moment or two of pure cinematic wonder. The wittiest feat of magic is the Louvre sequence in which Daffy and Bugs gleefully hop in and out of famous paintings, including the Mona Lisa and ''The Scream'' by Munch. The cheeky juxtaposition of Great Art and Pop Art has a breezy humor that's missing from the rest of the movie.
But words ultimately have little to do with the kind of laughter to be gleaned from ''Looney Tunes.'' The essence of its fun lies in the slam-bang banana-peel pratfalls and mishaps that only cartoon characters and classic clowns can sustain. ''Looney Tunes'' has just enough of it to hold the attention of children.
''Looney Tunes: Back in Action,'' 
~
In ''Elf,'' New York City -- and the rest of the world as well -- is suffering from a dearth of Christmas cheer. In the real world this seems to be a recurrent affliction, and every November movies like this one, which opens nationwide today, are shipped to theaters as part of a nationwide, studio-sponsored vaccination program. Some of them, like ''Santa Clause 2'' and ''How the Grinch Stole Christmas,'' spread the very disease they are meant to cure, clogging vulnerable immune systems with virulent sentimentality and turning perfectly decent, mild-tempered folk (movie critics, for instance) into Scrooges and Grinches.
Directed by Jon Favreau (''Made''), a fine character actor who has also dabbled in screenwriting (''Swingers'') and chat shows (''Dinner for Five'' on the Independent Film Channel), ''Elf'' is a charming, silly family Christmas movie more likely to spread real joy than migraine, indigestion and sugar shock. The movie succeeds because it at once restrains its sticky, gooey good cheer and wildly overdoes it.
The restraint comes from a jaunty, witty script by David Berenbaum, and also from the casting of two beloved old sitcom curmudgeons, Ed Asner and Bob Newhart, as Santa and his chief elf. The responsibility for overdoing it belongs to Will Ferrell, the oafishly adroit, shame-immune ''Saturday Night Live'' comedian who seems poised to enter the million-dollar pop-culture doofus pantheon alongside Adam Sandler, Jim Carrey and SpongeBob SquarePants.
This time out, Mr. Ferrell, admired for his television impersonation of George W. Bush, plays Buddy the Elf, who is not really an elf, but an overgrown human child raised by elves. Buddy, who towers over the other residents of the North Pole (thanks to some ingeniously designed sets and clever camera angles) is lovable but inept; he has been accepted by the elves, and is doted on by his adoptive father (Mr. Newhart), but he still does not quite fit in. And so, following the timeworn adoptee-in-search-of-birth-parent story line, Buddy sets out for New York, on a mission to find his roots and also to revive the faltering Christmas spirit of the notoriously cynical locals.
Among the more cynical of whom is his own dad, Walter Hobbs, an overworked, crabby children's-book editor played by James Caan. Walter, unaware of Buddy's existence (blame the 60's), neglects his wife (Mary Steenburgen) and younger son (Daniel Tay). When a DNA test (administered by Mr. Favreau, playing a doctor) establishes his paternity, Walter has no choice but to take Buddy in, and he is rapidly driven up the wall by his relentless, manic sweetness. Buddy's manner may have something to do with the quantities of candy, cookies and other holiday goodies he consumes at every meal; the elf diet, a reproof to the late Dr. Atkins, consists almost entirely of the most suspect kinds of carbohydrates.
Cutting through the sugar like a bracing dash of lemon juice is Zooey Deschanel, playing Jovie, an elf-for-hire at Gimbels, where Buddy stumbles into a job. Ms. Deschanel's extra-wide eyes and delicately pointy nose and chin give her face an elfin cast to begin with, and she is as plausible a love interest as a character as fundamentally sexless as Buddy could hope to have. He cheers her up, she calms him down, and together they manage to be sincere, cool and winningly goofy at the same time. The brisk, bouncy comedy holds still for one splendidly romantic moment, when Jovie and Buddy sing the teasing, back-and-forth wintertime seduction song ''Baby, It's Cold Outside.''
Mr. Favreau's direction has a relaxed, swinging rhythm, a reflection of the hipster nonchalance that has defined (and also limited) his acting style. The big, chaotic scenes sometimes lack polish and precision, but ''Elf'' also happily forgoes the slick, hyperactive aggression that makes so many live-action holiday comedies so wearying.
''Elf'' 
~
''Love Actually,'' which opens today nationwide, is an indigestible Christmas pudding from the British whimsy factory responsible for such reasonably palatable confections as ''Four Weddings and a Funeral,'' ''Notting Hill'' and ''Bridget Jones's Diary.'' A romantic comedy swollen to the length of an Oscar-trawling epic -- nearly two and a quarter hours of cheekiness, diffidence and high-tone smirking -- it is more like a record label's greatest-hits compilation or a ''very special'' sitcom clip-reel show than an actual movie.
The air is thick with bad pop songs, which those plucky, ironical Britons seem to love in spite of their badness. A sparkling British-American cast of newly minted and long familiar stars chirp, swoon, pine, quip and shed the odd tear. Presiding over it all is the new prime minister, a twinkly bachelor with a tonsorial resemblance to Tony Blair, who is played by none other than Hugh Grant. As he did in the far superior ''About a Boy,'' Mr. Grant makes a climactic onstage appearance at a school talent show. He also sings ''Good King Wenceslas'' and disco-dances around 10 Downing Street in his shirt sleeves.
In his opening voice-over, Mr. Grant establishes a new standard for bad taste masquerading as its opposite when he introduces this fluffy farrago, written and directed by Richard Curtis, with a reference to the World Trade Center attacks. The phone calls made from the towers, he suggests, show that however perilous the state of the world, ''love is all around.'' Further support for this thesis is gleaned from the arrival gate at Heathrow, where people tend to hug and kiss each other a lot.
Like much else in ''Love Actually,'' you almost buy this moment of banal sentiment, because it is so prettily shot and smartly spoken. But the film's governing idea of love is both shallow and dishonest, and its sweet, chipper demeanor masks a sour cynicism about human emotions that is all the more sleazy for remaining unacknowledged. It has the calloused, leering soul of an early-60's rat-pack comedy, but without the suave, seductive bravado. The worst kind of cad is the one who thinks he's really a sensitive guy deep down.
Most of the picture's half-dozen or so romantic subplots -- which lie scattered about like torn wrapping paper on Christmas morning -- involve workplace dalliances of one kind or another. The ones with the best chances of success all involve an older male boss and a young female subordinate. Jamie (Colin Firth), a writer cuckolded by his own brother, retreats to a villa in the South of France and falls for his Portuguese housekeeper, Aurelia, who speaks no English and who obligingly strips down to her underwear to rescue manuscript pages that have blown into the lake.
Harry (Alan Rickman), the head of a nonprofit organization, is besotted with his secretary, Mia (Heike Makatsh), who makes no secret of her attraction to him. The prime minister, moral exemplar of the nation, develops a crush on Natalie (Martine McCutcheon), a member of the Downing Street household staff. When the goatish president of the United States, in London for a state visit, puts the moves on her, the P.M.'s jealousy precipitates a chill in British-American relations (and also makes him a national hero).
The funniest and most winning on-the-job romance bubbles up between two people (Martin Freeman and Joanna Page) who work as body doubles on a movie set, miming explicit sex scenes in the absence of the prudish stars. As their naked bodies go through the motions, the two of them chat mildly about traffic and the weather, and their mutual attraction is sealed, on the first date, by a chaste kiss on the cheek.
The other genuine comic spark comes from Bill Nighy, playing a washed-up, dissolute rock star named Billy Mack, who is trying for a comeback with a treacly Christmas record. Billy says shocking, hilarious things in television and radio interviews, and his casual indifference to proper decorum makes him the most honest character in the film.
The problem is that the movie, more than any of the characters in it, is a mess of crossed signals, swerving between cynicism and sincerity without quite knowing the difference between them. It is most grotesque when it tries for earnest drama, parading the grief of a widower (Liam Neeson) and the humiliation of a middle-aged wife (Emma Thompson) before us when it thinks our throats need lumping.
It is disturbing to see Ms. Thompson's range and subtlety so shamelessly trashed, and to see Laura Linney's intelligence similarly abused as a lonely, frustrated do-gooder. The fate of their characters suggests that women who are not young, pert secretaries or household workers have no real hope of sexual fulfillment and can find only a compromised, damaged form of love. Perhaps Mr. Curtis wishes to offer this as an insight into contemporary social arrangements; if so, his indifference to the cruelty of those arrangements is truly breathtaking.
But it is unlikely that any particular insight was intended. Instead, ''Love Actually'' is a patchwork of contrived naughtiness and forced pathos, ending as it began, with hugging and kissing at the airport (where returning passengers are perhaps expressing their relief at being delivered from an in-flight movie like this one). The loose ends are neatly tied up, as they are when you seal a bag of garbage -- or if you prefer, rubbish.
''Love Actually'' 
~
''Everything that has a beginning has an end.'' This sentence appears on the front page of the production notes handed out at press screenings of ''The Matrix Revolutions,'' which opens worldwide today. It is also uttered by the Oracle (Mary Alice) in response to a question from Neo (Keanu Reeves). ''Where is this going?'' he wants to know. ''Where will it end?'' Neo may be the One, but he can hardly be the only One posing such questions. The talk of endings in this, the third and ostensibly final movie in the series, is so insistent that you may wonder whether the Wachowski brothers, who wrote and directed it, felt the need to reassure the audience, and perhaps themselves, that it was really, finally over. There are still a few loose ends that might be spun into future sequels -- ''The Matrix Recycled,'' perhaps, or ''The Matrix Recall Election'' or ''The Matrix Recipe Book and Holiday Menu Planner'' (featuring the Oracle's baking tips) -- but the saga of Neo, which began in 1999 when he was a scruffy hacker who took a red pill, has now by all appearances reached its terminus. The appropriate response is somewhere between ''About time'' (about six hours, depending on what's added for the DVD release) and ''So what?''
Still it would be unfair to the Wachowskis, special-effects virtuosos that they are, to say that their trilogy ends with a whimper. There is plenty of bright light and big noise in ''Revolutions'' -- a ferocious machine assault on battered Zion, a rain-swept showdown between Neo and his nemesis Smith (Hugo Weaving), a giant talking Wizard of Oz head. Some major characters meet gruesome deaths, while others endure heroically. But all this bombast, which may raise an honest goose bump or two, cannot dispel the overall atmosphere of exhaustion.
The first ''Matrix'' succeeded by entwining traditional -- and often breathtakingly innovative -- action-movie motifs with the mapping of an intricate and mysterious world. The Wachowskis were pioneers in bringing some of the exploratory fascination of advanced video games into the movies, and ''The Matrix'' was so absorbing because the viewer's initial disorientation and gradual enlightenment followed Neo's own initiation into the film's vividly imagined layers of reality and meaning. All of which have, perhaps inevitably, flattened out.
Once the game environment has been surveyed, there is nothing to do but play, which is never as enthralling, especially when the keyboard or the joystick is in someone else's hands. ''The Matrix Reloaded,'' which has become the highest-grossing movie of 2003 in spite of widespread disappointment among critics and fans alike, tried to extend the first film's elegant mixing of action and exposition, only to bog down hopelessly in portentousness and obfuscation.
''Reloaded'' was certainly a lumpy, gaseous treatise of a movie, but viewers of ''Revolutions'' may find themselves looking back on it fondly. It was at least overstuffed with potentially interesting new characters, plot lines and make-believe metaphysical conundrums. In contrast ''Revolutions,'' which has a roughly equivalent running time, feels padded. The battle for Zion goes on forever and seems designed to justify the picture's enormous military hardware budget. There is very little that is tantalizing or suspenseful. The feeling of revelation is gone, and many of the teasing implications of ''Reloaded'' have been abandoned.
Persephone and the Merovingian, the sinister computer-program power couple played by Monica Bellucci and Lambert Wilson, return only briefly, forcing countless budding Matrix scholars to toss out whole chapters of their dissertations and cheating those of us who counted on a little more old-style movie star voluptuousness to warm up the virtual chill.
Mr. Reeves, perhaps worried that he was showing too much range, has purged himself of all expression apart from a worried frown and a sorrowful grimace. The salient distinction of the human remnant in Zion, apart from their earth-tone natural-fiber fashions, has been the capacity for love, a word much spoken in this movie. But their ranks, in spite of the presence of fine actors like Laurence Fishburne, Harry Lennix and Harold Perrineau, become more robotic with every passing scene. The sole exception is Jada Pinkett Smith as the daredevil pilot Niobe, who brings a touch of bad-girl B-movie attitude into the humorless subterranean gloom.
The major disclosure of ''Revolutions'' is that the boundaries that had previously separated the real world from the Matrix, and the humans from the programs, have proven to be porous. Smith has jumped out of the Matrix, and Neo is able to export his special powers from that realm into the machine-controlled physical domain. It turns out that there is train service connecting the various worlds, though its only customers are two Indian computer programs who have apparently given birth to a human child, a lovely little girl named Sati. All of this may be puzzling -- I was puzzled, anyway -- but scenes like the one in which Neo meets Sati and her parents have a quiet, beguiling strangeness reminiscent of Stanley Kubrick.
If ''The Matrix'' were a video game -- I know there is one, but I mean the movies themselves -- then you could linger in that dazzling white subway station, or in the Oracle's kitchen while the cookies are baking and tune out all of the philosophical mumbo jumbo and action-movie clichés. You could reflect on the curious beauty of your surroundings and admire the skill of the architects (not to be confused with the Architect). ''The Matrix Relaxed'' -- now there's an idea for a sequel.
''The Matrix Revolutions'' 
~
The fine line separating good-hearted family movies from inspirational films that drum in moral values is breached by ''Brother Bear,'' a plush Disney animated movie that would like to think of itself as ''The Lion King Plus.''
Set in the Pacific Northwest at the end of the Ice Age, ''Brother Bear'' cobbles ancient cross-cultural myths of humans becoming animals into the coming-of-age story of a hotheaded boy, Kenai (voice of Joaquin Phoenix), who must change into a bear to attain the wisdom of manhood. This opulent movie, with gorgeous rainbow animation, is heavy on message but light on humor. Most of what passes for amusement comes from the forced, not-so-hilarious banter of two squabbling moose, Tuke (Dave Thomas) and Rutt (Rick Moranis).
Set among pristine glaciers in a land where the northern lights bloom much of the year, ''Brother Bear,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles and Nov. 1 nationwide, imagines a semi-Arctic pre-Columbian paradise where all members of the animal kingdom except humans speak the same language. But that language often has a jarring contemporary ring. Who knew that 10,000 years ago the word dude was as ubiquitous as it is today?
This self-conscious, self-important film has the machine-tooled, market-tested gloss of an A-list Disney product straining to conquer the world the way ''The Lion King'' did nearly a decade ago. But a lot has changed in the nine years since that movie began its campaign for world domination. Disney's more visually and conceptually sophisticated Pixar films have raised the bar in animation to such a high level that even ''The Lion King,'' were it released today, would probably have a very different reception.
Music floods ''Brother Bear'' like a storm surge, and its six songs by Phil Collins are noticeably heavier than Elton John's music for the prototype. Much of the instrumental music, composed by Mr. Collins and Mark Mancina, belongs to the same quasisymphonic, pseudo-African mode of ''The Lion King,'' whose solemn tribal beats and chants, augmented by what sounded like 101 strings, evoked the Dark Continent with the cast-of-thousands grandiosity of a Cecil B. DeMille soundtrack.
But what was a novelty back then has since been cloned so often that it is now the Hollywood equivalent of elevator music: World Music Lite.
If ''Brother Bear'' aspires to be ''The Lion King Plus,'' that plus is the infusion of ethnographic kitsch recycled from earlier Disney hits like ''Mulan'' and ''Pocahontas'' that adds moral tone, but no extra entertainment value.
The potpourri of myth and fantasy is swirled into a vague, all-purpose pop sermon whose message of restraint and empathy with all creatures great and small evokes everything from practicing the golden rule and following the Ten Commandments to supporting animal rights.
The story, briefly: Kenai, the youngest of three brothers, is disgruntled when he is presented with a totem of his incipient manhood, a carved bear symbolizing love. He would much rather have an eagle (signifying wisdom), like his oldest brother, Sitka (D. B. Sweeney). After a bear devours a basket of fish that Kenai carelessly tended, the boy pursues the scavenger with a vengeance. When the bear turns on Kenai, Sitka comes to the rescue, but dies saving his brother's life and ascends into the northern lights, where all the ancestral spirits dwell.
Before long those lights come down from above and turn Kenai into a bear who quickly discovers that, from a bear's perspective, spear- and knife-wielding humans are the monsters. Kenai is aghast to find himself fending off the attacks of the middle brother, Denahi (Jason Raize), who doesn't recognize his brother in his new form.
Kenai acquires a sidekick, Koda (Jeremy Suarez), a bear cub searching for his mother, and their adventures culminate on a mountain peak with another visit from the lights (and Sitka's ghost), which usher Kenai, now human again, into a wiser, gentler manhood in tune with nature.
Parents who take their children to see ''Brother Bear'' may bask in the illusion that the film is doing a far better job of teaching ethics than they ever could. But I wonder how many children go to any Disney movie hoping to learn values. Fun is what they want, and while ''Brother Bear'' has its lighter moments, it is no roller coaster of delight.
BROTHER BEAR
Directed by Aaron Blaise and Robert Walker; written by Tab Murphy, Lorne Cameron, David Hoselton, Steve Bencich and Ron J. Friedman; edited by Tim Mertens; score by Mark Mancina and Phil Collins, with songs by Phil Collins; art director, Robh Ruppel; produced by Chuck Williams; released by Walt Disney Pictures. At the Ziegfeld, 141 West 54th Street, Manhattan. Running time: 85 minutes. This film 
~
Since winning an Academy Award six years ago for ''Jerry Maguire,'' Cuba Gooding Jr. has spread himself dangerously thin in a succession of often junky movies. But the encouraging news about his role in the inspirational drama ''Radio'' is that he really gets to act, even though the film is a synthetic mush of molasses-soaked pablum.
As James Robert Kennedy, a k a Radio, a mentally retarded young African-American who collects portable radios and spends his days pushing a shopping cart around the streets of Anderson, a sleepy South Carolina town, Mr. Gooding creates a convincing portrait of a persecuted innocent.
Hunched into the cowering posture of a gentle, abused animal, Mr. Gooding conveys a mercurial blend of terror and childish glee that erupts across his face in lopsided, chipped-toothed grins. When he speaks, the words come out as the garbled cries of an excitable child just learning to talk. Because Mr. Gooding doesn't underplay his character's distracting tics, his performance makes you feel the uneasiness that Radio's presence provokes in the more heartless residents of Anderson, a town that lives and breathes football.
''Radio,'' with Mike Tollin as director and co-producer, was inspired by real events reported in Gary Smith's 1996 Sports Illustrated article ''Someone to Lean On.'' Its screenplay, by Mike Rich, a sports-movie specialist who wrote the fraudulent ''Finding Forrester'' and the more persuasive ''Rookie,'' adheres strictly to Hollywood's unwritten rules of how to handle disability and race in a family movie. Sweetness and light are required, along with a whopping amount of bald-faced denial.
The only description of Radio's condition is offered by his beloved mother, Maggie (S. Epatha Merkerson), a widowed, overstressed hospital worker. When she describes her son as ''the same as everybody else, just a little slower than most,'' it is the understatement of the year. The movie, which opens today nationwide, slavishly subscribes to the sentimental notion that the mentally retarded are chaste, angelic children with a purer capacity for love and goodness than you or I have. And although ''Radio'' is set in the South in 1976, there is not so much as a whisper about race.
The story follows the blossoming of Radio under the devoted tutelage of the town's high school football coach, Harold Jones (Ed Harris). Radio loves to watch the football team practicing behind a chain-link fence. After a nasty prank in which the team members imprison him in a shack, the coach makes it his personal mission to socialize the outcast, and Radio becomes the unofficial mascot of both the football and basketball teams.
The coach's mentoring incites angry opposition from a local banker, Frank Clay (Chris Mulkey), whose bullying son, Johnny (Riley Smith), is the town's star athlete. Frank and his friends feel that the football team's uneven performance is caused by the distractions of Radio's sideline antics as a kind of super-cheerleader. And when Johnny tricks Radio into barging into the girls' locker room, the townspeople's anxieties escalate. Meanwhile, Harold's teenage daughter, Mary Helen (Sarah Drew), resents her father's devoting so much tender love and care to someone who is not a member of the family.
Mr. Harris's coach is not a flashy role. But the actor, who effortlessly embodies an all-American ideal of strength and decency, drains as much of the syrup from his character as any actor could hope. The noble figure who emerges from his understated performance is a model of principled manhood, too good to be true, perhaps, but authentically heroic nonetheless.
''Radio'' 
~
Sitting through ''Beyond Borders,'' a romantic action-melodrama that follows a couple of glamorous movie stars as they tend to the needy in trouble spots like Ethiopia, Cambodia and Chechnya, is like watching someone try to dry his hands with sandpaper. No amount of misguided effort is going to help.
It's an easy picture to ridicule. After a while, you almost feel as if the stars are making fun of it. Or at least you wish Angelina Jolie, with her radiant presence and Panavision lips, and Clive Owen, with his brisk, existentialist cool, were smart enough to do so. After the ''Lara Croft: Tomb Raider'' movies, with their globe-trotting superficiality and numbing imbecility, Ms. Jolie must feel she owes her fans something serious. Unfortunately, she is starring in a movie even more benumbed and superficial, a liberal video game that demeans the very refugees it tries to spotlight.
Her good-heartedness is probably the reason she chose to star in this film, which opens today nationwide, about a shallow young woman, Sarah Jordan, who is shaken out of her insular existence in 1984. That's when the dashing Dr. Nick Callahan (Mr. Owen) invades the fund-raiser she is attending with her new husband, Henry (Linus Roache). A band has slammed through the Clash's ''Should I Stay or Should I Go?'' The song's title asks a spiritual question that will soon come to haunt not only Sarah but also the audience.
Nick has the gall to parade a slender Ethiopian boy named Jojo (Keelan Anthony) in front of the rich Londoners at the party just to get their attention. Sarah is so moved by Nick's socially conscious performance art that it doesn't occur to her how immensely self-serving his act is. In fact, not one person remarks that this supposed hero is depriving the child of dignity. Nick's act may not be racist, but it proves he is just as callous as those who have anted up to drink Champagne for charity. Hauled away by the police, Nick is sprung by the mysterious Steiger (Yorick Van Wageningen, whose curdled cunning is one of the movie's few high spots).
He tries to recruit Nick for C.I.A. work in the danger zones where he does his good deeds. When Nick walks away, he doesn't even mention Jojo -- the final insult.
''Beyond Borders,'' with a script by Caspian Tredwell-Owen, tries to dramatize the chasm between Sarah and Nick. That metaphorical land mass is supposed to be her middle-class naïveté and his hot-tempered, compassionate altruism. But they're much closer than they think -- a pair of noble idiots.
Inspired by his example, she raises money and follows him to Ethiopia with medical supplies and food. He repays her kindness with blithe cruelty. ''I can get you a picture of a rich white girl holding a black baby,'' he snorts as she cradles an African child wasted from malnutrition whom she has just saved from a vulture.
This scene might have a little more credibility if Sarah weren't swathed in fresh white linen.
Nick almost ruins a delicate negotiation with an Ethiopian army colonel determined to hijack the supplies until Elliott (Noah Emmerich), one of Nick's co-workers, steps up to ease tensions. ''He's got a lot on his hands right now,'' Elliott says, trying to explain Nick's hostility. The movie never even provides a sense of how good Nick is at his work, which might explain why his colleagues put up with tantrums that endanger their efforts and lives.
A few years later, after predictable strains in her marriage -- just as predictable as Nick's exhibition of vulnerability -- Sarah abandons her son to join Nick in Cambodia. He makes a destructive deal with Steiger that puts everyone in jeopardy and leads to a standoff that has a stomach-churning excitement: a grenade is placed in an infant's hand, and the baby cries while the situation intensifies. After all the trouble Nick has caused, Sarah clutches him and moans, ''Nick, this wasn't your fault.''
Then they finally tryst. The sweat beads seductively on their skins while they expel plumes of cigarette smoke that accentuate their glamorously gaunt jawlines.
It's probably fitting that one of the years that ''Beyond Borders'' covers is 1989, roughly the era of ''Cry Freedom,'' ''A Dry White Season'' and other garish white-man's-burden films about third world misery. Sarah and Nick shoulder all the pain of the world and barely have time for themselves; isn't it awful? The director, Martin Campbell, an accomplished action filmmaker, must have forgotten that in the 1940's ''Casablanca'' had the good sense to have Rick note that the troubles of two people don't amount to a hill of beans. ''Beyond Borders'' is reminiscent of another 40's classic, the smashingly absurd ''Duel in the Sun,'' and is as realistic as another recent film based on actual incidents, the remake of ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre.''
The movie's last section takes place in 1995. Nick is in Chechnya, where he has doubtless placed more refugees at risk in the name of rescuing them; he's the Inspector Clouseau of famine relief. By now, Sarah has added a daughter to her family and leaves the two children behind to find the captured Nick, perhaps because she understands that her skin will look like Limoges china in the flattering lighting reflected from the snow. ''You know as well as I do Chechnya is a very dangerous place,'' her sister (Teri Polo), a reporter, tells her.
A picture of such voluminous silliness and shrill naïveté that crosses a border into insensitivity almost makes you ask why Mr. Campbell bothered to make a movie that dances around real-life horrors. That is, until you realize that it would have been obscene if actual suffering had been so debased and trivialized. A crucial speech has a character talk about stepping on a land mine and hearing a deadly click. In the audience, you'll hear a similar noise and realize all hope is lost for those trapped in theaters with this picture.
''Beyond Borders'' 
~
Frannie, the heroine of Jane Campion's ''In the Cut,'' is a writer and teacher who collects curious scraps of language: pungent specimens of slang, wayward metaphors, provocative jargon. When a homicide detective on the trail of a serial killer describes the body of a murder victim as ''disarticulated,'' Frannie's ears perk up. She jots the word down in a notebook and later on pesters him for a precise definition.
The word is a euphemism for something appropriately grisly, the results of which occasionally flash before Frannie's eyes, and ours, as this atmospheric exploration of sexual need and urban paranoia unfolds. But it might also describe the movie itself, which is a disjointed, sometimes fascinating mélange of moods, associations and effects. The story turns out to be fairly conventional, with an end that is a stale pretzel bowl of surprise twists, and the psychology of the characters can be frustratingly obscure, but there are nonetheless images and ideas that stick like splinters under your skin.
Ms. Campion (''The Piano,'' ''The Portrait of a Lady'') is an inveterate navigator of the murkier zones of female sexuality, and ''In The Cut,'' adapted from Susanna Moore's novel, plots a hazardous nexus of dread, danger and desire. The camera, as it surveys the grimy streets and cramped apartments of Lower Manhattan, trembles as if it were running a fever, and the cinematography (by Dion Beebe) is jumpy and bleary-eyed. These effects seem intended to register Frannie's inner state, which is alternately morose and panicky. Meg Ryan, who plays Frannie, has darkened her hair and suppressed all of her characteristic perkiness for the role, which is both intriguing and maddeningly opaque.
Frannie, who lives alone, has only one friend, her half-sister, Pauline (Jennifer Jason Leigh), who lives in shabby rooms above a strip club and exudes the kind of woozy vulnerability that is never a good idea when a serial killer is on the loose. The men with whom Frannie associates are without exception the kinds of guys who may actually turn out to be serial killers. Her former lover and current stalker, played by Kevin Bacon, is a walking non sequitur with a red baseball cap and a hairless dog. He shows up at unwelcome moments and interjects loud obscenities without much provocation.
Her prize student, meanwhile, is a young African-American named Cornelius (Sharrieff Pugh), who hands in a term paper decorated in blood that argues that John Wayne Gacy, the notorious murderer, was innocent, and who allows Ms. Campion to engage, as she did in ''The Piano,'' in casual sexual stereotyping of nonwhite men.
The film's central (and most interesting) relationship is between Frannie and that disarticulating detective, whose name is Malloy and who is portrayed, with unnerving calm, by Mark Ruffalo. The source of Frannie's attraction to him is as vague as the rest of her personality, but their scenes together have a psychological undertow missing from the rest of the movie. Mr. Ruffalo's whispery intensity and the narcotizing, hesitant rhythms of his speech seem to draw Ms. Ryan out of her stupor even as they tilt our curiosity away from her and toward him.
The two of them go through the motions of a love affair that is at once raw and hesitant and that might have made for a bracing, erotic psychodrama. Instead ''In the Cut,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is an ungainly hybrid.
''In the Cut'' 
~
Directed by Marcus Nispel
R, 98 minutes
With a budget many times that of the 1974 drive-in classic on which it is based, Marcus Nispel's ''Texas Chainsaw Massacre'' delivers proportionately fewer thrills and no discernible suspense. It is, instead, a long march to the slaughterhouse that seems to take forever to get going and, once it does, goes nowhere that hasn't been visited before by more talented filmmakers.
Inspired as much by Jonathan Demme's 1991 ''Silence of the Lambs'' (from which it borrows its repulsively detailed inventory of a killer's lair) and by David Fincher's 1995 ''Seven'' (the bled-out color and atmosphere of decay) as by Tobe Hooper's original film, this movie seems painfully derivative just where Mr. Hooper's was technically crude but quite original: in its application of the psychology of horror.
Very much a product of its time, the original was a paranoid vision in which a band of hippies fell into the clutches of a monstrous family evolved from Richard Nixon's middle Americans. Mr. Hooper imagined the rotting nuclear family formed by the Sawyer clan (oddly renamed the Hewitts in the remake) exacting its final parental revenge on the flower-power generation, represented as a group of helpless children.
In the remake, with Hollywood's current master of budgetary excess, Michael Bay (''Pearl Harbor'') as co-producer, the killings have little sociological or psychological resonance. This is a blunt and graphic gore film, replete with close-ups of splattered brain matter and twitching severed limbs.
To his credit, Mr. Nispel, a veteran of music videos making his first feature, does not take refuge in camp humor; he plays the violence as straight and as punishingly as possible. But punishment is not what the action public of 2003 is looking for: since ''The Silence of the Lambs,'' the audience has been encouraged to identify with charismatic killers as they go about their business, something the remade ''Chainsaw'' staunchly refuses to offer.
From R. Lee Ermey's degenerate small-town sheriff to Andrew Bryniarski's hulking Leatherface (the chainsaw-wielding killer, now with a mask fashioned out of human flesh), the villains are either too grotesque or too remote to invite easy assimilation. Reduced to identifying, uncomfortably enough, with the victims (chiefly, the lovely but inexpressive Jessica Biel), the audience made its dissatisfaction vocally clear at a recent New York preview screening of Mr. Nispel's film, which opens today nationwide. Rather than exhilaration, this bilious film offers only entrapment and despair. It's about as much fun as sitting in on an autopsy.
''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre'' 
~
Gene Hackman and Dustin Hoffman have never shared the screen before, as they do in ''Runaway Jury,'' the latest film adaptation of a paranoiac John Grisham courtroom potboiler. Yet something feels familiar about the picture -- Mr. Hackman has played this grubby-souled, hand-tailored heart of modern corruption before, and in a previous Grisham adaptation: ''The Firm'' (1993). This time he's a slick jury consultant named Rankin Fitch -- apparently Lex Luthor was already taken -- who employs ruthless, pre-Miranda tactics generally seen on the Fox News channel to empanel a jury favorable to his client.
In this case, the client is a weapons manufacturer being sued by the family of a casualty of gun violence, and Fitch is so gung-ho in accomplishing his task that he treats the defense lawyer, Cable (Bruce Davison), like a batboy. In Mr. Grisham's novel, the corporate villain was a tobacco company, a bad guy already pilloried in ''The Insider.'' The producers must have realized that by the time ''Jury'' hit home video, Americans might not even be allowed to smoke in their own imaginations anymore.
As in ''The Firm,'' the schematic crassness of the narrative provides a group of actors with the opportunity to deliver some fine work. John Cusack gives one of his wiliest performances in some time, and one of his most mature, as Nick Easter, an aging slacker drafted into jury duty. He subverts his protracted-adolescent cheekiness and pours the melted charm into something far bleaker.
Apparently the writers realize there is not much to be done with the boilerplate narrative, which involves the machinations of the jury that Fitch is laboring to bend to his will. Instead they resolve to work around the bullying morality play -- which, unfortunately, can't be done often enough. Case in point: Fitch's nemesis is the endearing Wendall Rohr (Mr. Hoffman), lawyer for the plaintiff. (Rohr has been beefed up from his sideline-size role in the book, and Mr. Hoffman splashes the role with pan gravy.) When Rohr notes that Southern jurors don't trust well-dressed men and makes an ostentatiously tacky choice in necktie, the only logical -- and lazy -- follow-up is Fitch's arrival in a suit made of wool so fresh it still drips lanolin.
It soon becomes evident that Fitch is not the only person trying to manipulate the jury into rendering an advantageous verdict. Readers of the novel, and there seem to have been several hundred thousand of them, know exactly where the skeletons are buried. And those who didn't read the book will get to see most of the performers, excluding Mr. Hackman and Mr. Hoffman, encouraged to demonstrate their strengths and have fun with the material.
Mr. Cusack wrings contradictions out of his genial, buffoonish persona that show an actor's canniness at work -- he earns the dark circles under his eyes as he observes his fellow jurors. Nora Dunn gleams as an upstanding and unsteady juror. The British actress Rachel Weisz, as the mysterious Marlee, uses her American accent almost as a kind of put-on -- this time, the point of it is to make us unsure. And the cantankerous Bruce McGill barks like an arthritic junkyard dog; he's the flinty judge, getting away with murder so often while reminding the legal teams who run the courtroom that he might be brought up on charges.
Still, you may end up wishing that the actors had found a less needlessly show-offy picture to practice their craft. Especially since half the time they're filmed as if they were in the way of the director, Gary Fleder. Mr. Fleder tries to boldface his assets, though in doing so he undermines the picture. He stages ''Jury,'' which opens nationwide today, as if it were an episode of ''C.S.I.''
The cameras cruise the Mephistophelean Fitch, tilted up toward his hollow magnificence and anointing him the Prince of Darkness, lording it over a techno-intense war room that seems to be from a Jerry Bruckheimer version of ''The Sting.'' With his pointy beard and cunning squint to emphasize his perfidy, Fitch is missing only a cloven hoof and a trail of smoke when he enters a room.
Mr. Fleder's stylized technique does function well when he sets up the story, creating a crime-novel sense of dread out of the horrible event that leads to the lawsuit. Perhaps his impulse to overdo things springs from an instinctive rejection of the corniness of Mr. Grisham's conceit, with its tired morality.
But the director doesn't inject superfluous flourishes in the one instance in which it might have been called for -- the scene between Mr. Hoffman and Mr. Hackman, in which their respect for each other's prowess keeps them restrained. They're too polite to strike sparks in a picture so full of pyrotechnics it could be charged with arson.
''Runaway Jury'' might have been better served if the casting was reversed, and Mr. Hoffman's small stature and busy methods were contrasted with Mr. Hackman's gift for playing weary reason.
''Runaway Jury'' 
~
Directed by John Hoffman
PG, 88 minutes
You probably didn't even know that dogs came from outer space. As ''Good Boy!'' spells out, they traveled to Earth thousands of years ago from Sirius (the dog star) to colonize and rule the planet. But they and the earthlings got along so well that they decided to forget the ruling part. Now Canid 3942, an extraterrestrial border terrier with the voice of Matthew Broderick, has come to see how things are going. He is understandably horrified when he learns that dogs have become pets.
As children's film premises go, this is a cute one, but the execution is a failure. As Owen, the boy who adopts the terrier from the pound, Liam Aiken does a nice job of conveying adolescent vulnerability and affection. And 3942, whom Owen names Hubble, becomes a character who matters. But over all, the film suffers from a singular lack of imagination. And energy.
Attempts at humor include the ridicule of pet lovers who talk baby talk to animals; dogs falling asleep while trying to learn meditation; the comparison of canned dogged food to pâté; that old standby, flatulence; and breed-specific behavior. When Barbara Ann, a froufrou standard poodle, talks in Delta Burke's voice about how pretty she is, young moviegoers are unlikely to find it any funnier than adults do. ''Good Boy!'' reinforces breed stereotypes, and poodles should sue.
Humans receive more politically sensitive treatment. Owen's best friend is a black girl; one neighborhood dog belongs to two gay men; and when Owen is surprised to learn that the Greater Dane (Vanessa Redgrave), the highest leader on Sirius, is a she, Hubble says, ''Of course.'' (Dogs talk in this movie, but only Owen can understand them.)
The film, which opens today nationwide, does have its moments. Hubble/3942's detailed response to the command ''play dead'' is impressive. And the children in a preview audience laughed when Shep (Carl Reiner), the Bernese mountain dog, got a Japanese paper lantern stuck on his head.
Molly Shannon and Kevin Nealon, ''Saturday Night Live'' alumni, play Owen's parents, who make their living buying, restoring and selling houses. They are unwittingly destroying their son's emotional health by moving constantly, a problem that children can understand. The gentle celebration of human-and-dog relationships, on the other hand, will probably go over a lot of little heads.
''Good Boy!'' 
~
The film adaptation of Frances Mayes's best-selling memoir ''Under the Tuscan Sun'' feels so schematic that only the depressed Frances (Diane Lane) is surprised by the unfolding events. The story of self-discovery through which the writer and director Audrey Wells leads Frances is eminently superficial, although Ms. Wells keeps the movie going with a steady, commanding hand and casts it with an actress who can deftly downshift from serene to sodden.
Ms. Lane plays a writer who, at the outset, projects a calm and pleasant sunniness, though she is resigned to never finishing her book. Frances is attending a former student's book signing early in the movie when she is hit with a spray of poetic justice. A writer whose book she panned in a review gives her a paralyzing comeuppance. That author recites Frances's dismissal: she found his novel to be a juvenile indulgence of fantasies about a middle-aged man chasing young girls. Then he drops a bomb that levels her existence: ''Go ask your husband,'' he says through a smirk.
This is how Frances finds out about the fact, and the nature, of her husband's betrayal, and the muscles in her face seem to disappear when she does. All that is holding her features onto her head is her skin, which sags under the gravitational pull of misery. This is when it becomes clear that ''Sun,'' which opens nationwide today, is going to ask a lot of Ms. Lane, and of the audience, because delivering an entire performance based on varying expressions of despondency is a huge demand of anyone. But this seems to be the month of actors using dislocation as a method for working out inner turmoil -- first Bill Murray in ''Lost in Translation'' and now Ms. Lane in ''Sun.''
Ms. Wells is wise enough to keep Frances's sense of gallows humor in play throughout. When Frances's husband pressures her into giving up the San Francisco home she paid for -- and renovated with money borrowed from her mother -- a glimmer of panic and amusement plays across her mouth. Disbelief becomes a physical force, pulling her out of despondency and inertia.
Rudderless and without her home, the humiliated Frances winds up in an apartment building filled with the emotionally walking wounded, a by-the-month purgatory for other casualties of divorce. She can hear the wails of her neighbor through the walls. Ms. Wells uses this for comic relief and to spark Frances into making a move. Frances realizes that if she stays, she will become one of the living dead in the building. (It seems to be the same building that Niles Crane was trapped in on ''Frasier.'')
When her best friend, Patti (Sandra Oh), gives Frances a ticket to Tuscany, she grabs it. Patti doesn't want to fly because she is newly pregnant. Ms. Oh's clear, sharp performance is the kind of work that solidifies careers. She is the voice of common sense, and she makes up for years of toiling on the third-rate sitcom ''Arliss'' with the spiritual smarts she gives Patti.
In Italy Frances finds a new love -- a rundown villa, Bramasole, that she buys on the spur of the moment. But Tuscany is not the soul-saver that Frances hopes for. The house's promises of romance and a new life in Tuscany don't burst into bloom like the sunflowers that are often in view. She has a crush on the gentleman realtor, Martini (Vincent Riotta). He obviously has feelings for her, and he plays Martini with a genteel, aching shyness; he won't give up his wife and home for an affair.
But these are the only adult touches in a movie that is not exactly about an adult. Despite the devotion Ms. Wells gives to the details and other characters in Frances's life, you may find yourself waiting for someone to grab her by the shoulders and tell her to snap out of it. At times she acts like a lovelorn kid, especially when there is a subplot involving a Polish laborer restoring her home who falls for a young local girl.
Frances seems too adult to be so self-involved, and that is a compliment to the conception of her character. A contrast is offered by Katherine (Lindsay Duncan), a 50ish Englishwoman who has made Tuscany her home. Dwelling in a protracted adolescence, she has been enraptured by Italy ever since Fellini took a liking to her when she was a teenager. However, since Katherine's life involves sporting dramatic haberdashery that Joan Crawford may have left behind and chasing young art-boys who leave her as dejected as Frances, this is not much of an alternative.
Fellini's influence appears again when a dreamboat named Marcello (Raoul Bova) shows up in Frances's life. The lesson of ''Sun'' is that Frances needs to look closer at the big picture, and her avoidance of this raises questions about how perceptive a literary critic she may have been. But reality doesn't exactly intrude in this movie. The film overlooks the actual cost of this ground-up refurbishing, which makes ''Sun'' nebulous and wobbly. It suggests there is nothing concrete at stake and makes Frances's plight seem more insubstantial, if that is possible. She appears to be a wounded dilettante, damaged goods as frilly as Katherine.
Eventually, after Frances has suffered enough, the film slaps on a happy ending like a Post-it note, but her reward is not earned. This conclusion cheapens what Frances has endured and is the equivalent of saying that all the work on her villa didn't raise her property values by a single euro.
''Under the Tuscan Sun'' 
~
Directed by Peter Berg
PG-13, 98 minutes
With ''The Rundown,'' the professional wrestler known as the Rock (real name: Dwayne Douglas Johnson) makes a formal announcement of his candidacy for the post recently abandoned by Arnold Schwarzenegger. Mr. Schwarzenegger himself graciously appears in a cameo, leaving a wild party in a disco as the Rock makes his way in. As they pass each other, Mr. Schwarzenegger salutes his would-be replacement. ''Have fun,'' he says, as if offering two words of career advice to his younger (though perhaps even larger) successor.
That's the only genuinely resonant moment in ''The Rundown,'' which opens today nationwide. The film is otherwise a strictly formulaic action picture that suggests some of Mr. Schwarzenegger's early, low-budget vehicles, like ''Commando'' (1985) and ''Raw Deal'' (1986). The Rock plays Beck, a reluctant enforcer for a Los Angeles loan shark who is sent to the jungles of Brazil (though the film was shot in Hawaii) to retrieve his boss's son Travis (Seann William Scott of the ''American Pie'' series).
But Travis isn't eager to return, having discovered the location of a valuable golden idol, cunningly concealed for centuries in a hidden, booby-trapped cave. Hatcher (Christopher Walken), the cynical American who owns and operates a hellish open-pit gold mine in the area, is also after Travis's secret, as is Mariana (Rosario Dawson), a local beauty who owns a bar but harbors a big secret of her own.
As Mr. Scott chatters, the Rock pummels, a dynamic that has surfaced in practically every buddy action picture since Walter Hill paired Nick Nolte and Eddie Murphy in ''48 Hrs.'' (1982). The casting of Mr. Walken immediately relieves the screenwriters, R. J. Stewart and James Vanderbilt, of the burden of writing a character for him: he delivers his standard creepy, campy performance, punctuated by a few feral yelps. And Ms. Dawson is, as always, an extremely attractive presence.
The director, Peter Berg (''Very Bad Things''), keeps the predictable story line on course without developing a truly compelling momentum in the action sequences or finding anything fresh in the interaction of the stock characters. One exceptional moment finds the Rock facing down a practitioner of Brazilian kick-boxing, a tiny man who, jabbing, jumping and swinging from handy vines, is just as quick and mercurial as the Rock is large and stolid. It's like watching a hippopotamus take on a mosquito, and the hippopotamus is the underdog.
''The Rundown'' 
~
Directed by Émile Gaudreault
Rated R, 88 minutes
The marketers of ''Mambo Italiano'' would like nothing more than to position it as a broad, sloppy, ethnic comedy-romance in the recently minted tradition of ''My Big Fat Greek Wedding.'' But this Canadian film by Émile Gaudreault, based on a stage play by Steve Galluccio, is more suggestive of that venerable dinner-theater hit ''Norman . . . Is That You?,'' filmed by George Schlatter in 1976 but doubtless still playing somewhere on the surf-and-turf circuit.
The hero and narrator of ''Mambo Italiano'' is Angelo Barberini (Luke Kirby), a sweet-faced young resident of Montreal's Italian neighborhood, once mercilessly tormented by his high school peers for his allegedly effeminate behavior. As the film opens, he has grown into a full-fledged gay man, though he is still living with his parents, Maria (Ginette Reno) and Gino (Paul Sorvino). Though their house is in a cozy corner of suburban Montreal, its interior looks like an only slightly miniaturized version of Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas, filled with gilt, plaster statues and exotic marble.
Angelo's parents are first-generation immigrants to Canada. (''Nobody told me there were two Americas,'' Mr. Sorvino's character says, ''the real one and the phony one.'') They still speak with theatrical accents and have outrageously reactionary ideas. Angelo finally works up the courage to move out of his parents' home and into an apartment with Nino (Peter Miller), a policeman who was once one of the schoolboys who tormented Angelo but is now a gay (though closeted) man himself. The problem for Angelo and Nino is how to keep their loving relationship a secret from their volatile parents, who are still eagerly fixing them up with ''nice Italian girls.''
As you might expect, much of ''Mambo Italiano'' is devoted to colorful, food-splattering expressions of shock and outrage on the part of Angelo's parents, once they finally discover his secret. Unexpectedly, though, the film, which opens today in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, spins into light seriousness when Nino, frightened by the reaction of his smothering mother (Mary Walsh), resolves to turn himself straight and starts dating Pina (Sophie Lorain), an aggressive businesswoman who becomes the film's designated heavy.
Mr. Gaudreault's direction is about as basic as it can get: his film consists almost entirely of close-ups, with a cut from one character to the next at the end of each line. The accents wobble, from Mr. Sorvino's Chico Marx delivery to the distinctly French-inflected line readings of some of the local actors, including Ms. Lorain and Ms. Reno. As Angelo, Mr. Kirby has a boyish charm, which is probably the best that can be said for this film as well.
''Mambo Italiano'' 
~
If the molasses-drenched coming-of-age movie ''Secondhand Lions'' yanks the pubescent Haley Joel Osment back to Earth from outer space, Hollywood's forlorn Boy With the Faraway Eyes still doesn't seem to have landed with both feet in the real world. As Walter, a wholesome 14-year-old abruptly transplanted from suburbia to a big, crumbling house on the prairie in central Texas, Mr. Osment has a deeper voice and a more focused gaze. But at 15 he still seems emotionally unattached to a character facing fearful challenges that would leave the average middle-school student quaking in his sneakers.
Dumped by his Las Vegas-bound floozy of a mother, Mae (Kyra Sedgwick), at the ranch owned by two elderly uncles, Walter finds himself the reluctant surrogate son of these grumpy old men reputed to be sitting on a hidden stash worth millions. The molasses begins to flow within minutes. For beneath their crotchety surfaces, Garth and Hub McCann (Michael Caine and Robert Duvall) are really avuncular pussycats.
Apple-cheeked Walter, who thought he couldn't survive without television, soon blossoms into a modern John Boy Walton, but without the earnest literary pretensions. Although the movie, which opens today nationwide, is set in the early 1960's, its storybook ambience conjures a folksy all-decade Americana that suggests ''Shane'' filtered through Norman Rockwell.
Walter learns to plant and harvest corn and becomes the loving caretaker of an over-the-hill circus lion that the uncles buy on a whim. As a wild animal, the beast (a female) turns out to be a sleepy-eyed dud, refusing to act leonine until she escapes into a cornfield and is reminded of her jungle roots. Doglike in her devotion to Walter, she comes through for the boy in a crisis that requires her to be ferocious but not lethal.
The curmudgeonly uncles, whose property is posted with dire warnings for visitors to turn back, spend much of their free time on the front porch with shotguns at their sides, waiting to drive away the hordes of traveling salesmen who have heard of their wealth. The movie is a piece of cake for Mr. Caine and Mr. Duvall because it lets them ham it up without having to think very hard.
Garth and Hub, like every other character in the film, are homespun caricatures in a live-action cartoon that prompts you to hiss the villains (there are several) and cheer on the good guys. These two great veteran actors know exactly where to draw the line and prevent endearing folksiness from turning cornball.
Of the two, Mr. Caine's Garth (played with an impeccable Middle-American accent) is the quieter and more philosophical. He regales Walter with tall-sounding tales of the brothers' fantastic overseas adventures decades earlier. As he rambles on, the movie visualizes these swashbuckling feats of rescue and romance as pulpy comic-book tableaus or scenes from a bottom-drawer Hollywood costume drama churning in Walter's imagination.
The tale begins at the close of World War I, when the brothers, who have been traveling the world, are drugged and shanghaied into the French Foreign Legion. Garth becomes a sidekick of the rambunctious Hub, whose high adventures involve rescuing distressed damsels from white-slave traders and Arab chieftains. Hub's crowning act is to pluck his true love, a beautiful Arab princess, from the clutches of the evil sheik who kidnapped her.
Hub, who is as macho as any John Wayne character, likes to pontificate in gravelly cadences on how to be a man. An invincible fighter even in his 70's, he is still able to subdue a gang of callow teenage hoodlums single-handedly.
''Secondhand Lions,'' written and directed by Tim McCanlies, who concocted the screenplay for ''Iron Giant,'' may be pure hokum, but at least it knows how to spin a yarn. It cannily refuses to solve its twin mysteries -- the existence and whereabouts of the brothers' legendary cache, and the truth or falsehood of Garth's tales -- until the very end, when it pays off like a slot machine spewing millions in play money.
''Secondhand Lions'' 
~
Directed by Len Wiseman
Rated R, 121 minutes
Vampires and werewolves are, for some reason, at war. Some, including the vampire warrior Selene (Kate Beckinsale, impersonating Lara Flynn Boyle), are wearing long black leather coats like Keanu Reeves's in ''The Matrix.'' You'd expect a lot more neck-piercing, blood-sucking and general mauling, but instead the combatants seem to enjoy doing choreographed battle with big, boxy semiautomatic weapons in both hands.
The vampires live in dark Gothic splendor, in a house they refer to as the mansion, which looks like an Edwardian gentlemen's club set up for one of those group photos in Vanity Fair. This film does have some visual style, sometimes a little too much. The director of photography is Tony Pierce-Roberts, who was the cinematographer for ''Howards End'' and other Merchant-Ivory beauties.
Otherwise, Len Wiseman's ''Underworld,'' which opens nationwide today, achieves only loudness, aggressive confusion and one of the silliest head-splittings in film history. Or at least since Anthony Hopkins, as Hannibal Lecter, enjoyed dinner from Ray Liotta's skull. You can't say that Danny McBride's script is laden with clichés. The dialogue (''We have much to discuss.'' ''Mark my words: soon you'll be seeing things my way.'') isn't that purposeful; it's just stiff.
Clearly, Mr. Wiseman is in love with Ms. Beckinsale, who benefits from countless, glamour-lighted close-ups. On the other hand, her co-star, Scott Speedman -- known to television fans as Ben, the hunky college boy in the WB series ''Felicity'' -- is not given nearly enough time to look cute for the camera. He's too busy being attacked, tortured and hunted down. Mr. Speedman's character, Michael Corvin, is a young doctor (well, intern) who doesn't know he's descended from a family that has both vampire and lycan (werewolf) blood. A lot of creatures are worried about just how powerful that combination can be, so maybe the film is a political statement on intermarriage.
And just a thought: if you're going to tell a tale of a normal human abducted by monsters and drawn into a horrific new world, maybe you'd want to tell a little more of it from the human's point of view?
''Underworld'' 
~
In his last movie, ''Hollywood Ending,'' Woody Allen played a film director who had gone blind. Not a bad joke, except that it seemed to represent a case of what psychoanalysts might call displacement. Mr. Allen's recent movies, after all, look just fine, full of the usual gorgeous Manhattan light (courtesy of cinematographers like Zhao Fei) and warm, well-appointed interiors (thanks to the efforts of Mr. Allen's longtime production designer, Santo Loquasto). No, the problem with ''Hollywood Ending,'' as with ''Small Time Crooks'' and especially ''The Curse of the Jade Scorpion,'' was that the screenwriter (Mr. Allen, of course) was going deaf. His ear for the idioms of New York speech had faltered gravely, and the timing and concision of his jokes seemed terminally off.
While he may not be altogether cured, Mr. Allen is at least convalescing. ''Anything Else,'' his tart new antiromantic comedy, which opens today nationwide, is small-scale and loose. It feels oddly long for a Woody Allen picture, but its relaxed, casual air gives the humor room to breathe, and a gratifyingly high proportion of the piled-up one-liners actually raise a laugh. ''Funny is money,'' says Danny DeVito, who plays a desperate talent manager with a questionable talent for management, and ''Anything Else,'' while no great bargain, is funny enough that your own dollars will not be wasted.
It helps that Mr. Allen, whom I am alarmed to find looking more like my late grandfather every time I see him, has declined to cast himself as the romantic lead. That role, also known as the Woody Allen surrogate, belongs to Jason Biggs, the amiable star of the recently consummated ''American Pie'' trilogy and other young adult entertainments like ''Loser'' and ''Saving Silverman.'' Mr. Biggs plays Jerry Falk, a young comedy writer with the expected array of problems: an uncommunicative therapist (William Hill), the aforementioned manager and, above all, a spectacularly difficult girlfriend, Amanda, played with feral, neurotic glee by Christina Ricci.
On paper, Amanda -- dishonest, unfaithful, manipulative, undermining and so on -- might look like the figment of a sour, misogynistic imagination. But Ms. Ricci, backed up by Stockard Channing, who plays Amanda's wayward mother, turns her into a full-blooded comic monster. You can see why Jerry is so helplessly smitten with her, and not only when she stalks around their apartment in her underwear. Her reckless spontaneity and crazy emotional rhythms knock him out of his rut of responsibility and make him feel reassuringly sane.
The two of them also, less convincingly, share certain cultural passions and opinions; their riffs on Billie Holiday and Dostoyevsky sound spliced in from an old print of ''Manhattan.'' But at least Mr. Allen has found the wit to portray younger New Yorkers with something other than contemptuous indifference.
In any case, as so often happens, Jerry and Amanda's relationship has gone terribly awry; it's not so much a dead shark, to steal a line from ''Annie Hall,'' Mr. Allen's greatest breakup comedy, as one intent on devouring everything in its path. But poor Jerry is stuck: his defining neurosis is an inability to cut the ties that bind and gag him, which is why he needs an alter ego of his own, a father confessor and mentor to guide him toward a mature, responsible and fulfilling life.
Which sounds like a job for . . . Woody Allen? The director yammers and flails onto the screen in the role of David Dobel, an older comedy writer who takes Jerry under his skinny, perpetually flapping wing. The wonderful thing about Dobel is that he is both an extension of earlier characters Mr. Allen has played and a rebuke to much of what they stood for. ''Do you know anything about psychoanalysis?'' Jerry earnestly asks him, and the line gets an immediate laugh. Who does he think he's talking to? But it turns out that Dobel has no use for Freud, preferring the wisdom of Henny Youngman and other traditional Jewish sages.
Dobel works as a schoolteacher and favors big words like hebetudinous and tergiversation, but one of his defining traits is a gruff, finger-in-the-chest anti-intellectualism. Another is raging paranoia, most of it focused on the omnipresent specter of anti-Semitism. But whereas earlier characters might have expressed this state of mind through cringing and self-pity, Dobel, though nuts, is also tough minded, pragmatic and vengeful. He persuades Jerry to buy a gun, and -- in a scene Woody Allen fans have been waiting 30 years to savor, whether we knew it or not -- takes a crowbar to the car of a pair of enormous bullies who have stolen his parking space.
Though Manhattan (shot this time by Darius Khondji) is as lovely, and as loved, as ever -- especially Central Park, which gives off an easy glow of enchantment in the background -- ''Anything Else'' views the city as a land of traps and snares. Dobel, intervening on his young friend's behalf, nudges Jerry toward a future in Los Angeles, where a nice television job is waiting. In ''Annie Hall,'' of course, California was a New York writer's worst nightmare, a land of endless vacuousness, without the friction and frenzy that make life interesting. (In ''Hollywood Ending'' it was the land of smooth talk and big money.)
This time, though, the golden West hovers as an attractive alternative, an escape from the enervating habits and connections that already, in his early 20's, threaten Jerry's sense of balance. The moral of this odd, diverting fable may not be all that shocking, unless of course, you consider the source. What solutions does Mr. Allen, in his aging wisdom, offer his young hero? Dump your girlfriend, fire your agent, buy a gun and -- perhaps above all -- terminate your analysis. Done.
''Anything Else'' 
~
As a young boy in 1980, Darrin Hill sees his mother kicked out of the church choir in her Georgia hometown for singing sexy, sinful R&B music, after which she takes to the road, dragging her son through a nomadic childhood of nightclubs and concert halls. When he returns home for a beloved aunt's funeral two decades later, Darrin, grown into a slick New York advertising executive (and also into Cuba Gooding Jr.), runs into Lilly, his boyhood sweetheart, who has grown into a sultry chanteuse (and also into Beyoncé Knowles), and discovers that she has recently suffered a similar ostracism.
''The Fighting Temptations,'' a strenuously uplifting comedy that opens today nationwide, tells how Darrin becomes the director of the choir that exiled his mother, wins the heart of the suspicious Lilly and in the process transforms himself from a self-involved yuppie into a pillar of the community. The movie, directed by Jonathan Lynn from a creaky script by Elizabeth Hunter and Saladin K. Patterson, is both implausible and predictable, but it does touch on one of the deepest and oldest themes in American popular music: the uneasy, symbiotic relationship between sacred and profane, which has touched the careers of singers, famous and obscure, black and white, from Hank Williams to Aretha Franklin and beyond.
The movie -- whose roster of musical talent includes, beyond Beyoncé, Shirley Caesar, Montell Jordan and the O'Jays -- is less interesting for what it says about the struggle between the secular and the sanctified than for what it demonstrates about the contemporary state of that struggle. It was produced by MTV films, the movie-making arm of a cable channel not generally known for its piety. It is, however, known for its acute demographic and marketing savvy, and ''The Fighting Temptations'' is the latest evidence that Christian music, represented here in styles and genres ranging from old-style handclaps and hollers to hip-hop to ultraslick orchestral pop, has crossed over into the mainstream.
A generation or two ago, a movie like this would have built a bridge from the church to the dance hall, arguing, against the narrow-mindedly devout, for the value of godless, good-time music. While ''The Fighting Temptations'' preserves the stereotype of the uptight religious hypocrite (LaTanya Richardson), who steamrollers over her brother, the weak-willed pastor played by Wendell Pierce), it is more interested in justifying the Lord's music than the Devil's, in showing believers a good time while proving to skeptics that Christian music can be cool.
If the musicians in question are the O'Jays, who happen to staff the local barbershop in the tranquil southern hamlet of Montecarlo, Ga., then I'm a believer. In the case of Beyoncé, though, I'm not so sure. She performs several numbers, among them the decidedly ungodly ''Fever,'' as well as some more wholesome songs, as if to demonstrate that she can be beatified and bootylicious without contradiction. Unfortunately, she is not very convincing either way, giving off neither sensual heat nor spiritual radiance.
Mr. Gooding can be so irrepressibly bouncy that you want to swat him with a tennis racket, but even his kinetic energy cannot keep the movie from lurching and stumbling. And Beyoncé's emotional inertia smothers all his hardworking joy and breathless spontaneity. Mike Epps, once again playing a silly, motor-mouth sidekick, helps hold up the comic end of this awkward contraption, as does Steve Harvey as a drunken radio D.J. But the pairing of Mr. Epps and Mr. Gooding is a curious one, since it in effect burdens the movie with two motor-mouth sidekicks. Without foils, they flail. Where is Ice Cube when you need him?
Most likely working on the sequel to ''Barbershop,'' a movie whose homey, bootstrap conservatism ''The Fighting Temptations'' clearly wants to emulate. But unlike ''Barbershop'' or other recent comedies, like ''Drumline'' and ''Kingdom Come,'' that find inspiration, comic and otherwise, in southern black life and culture, this movie feels phony and slick, as if it were cooked up by Darrin's cynical ad agency, rather than at his aunt's stove down in Montecarlo.
''The Fighting Temptations'' 
~
Making a satisfying horror film is as difficult as cooking a perfect risotto. Split-second timing and a meticulous balance of ingredients are critical for achieving a rich but chewy consistency. The elements that make up ''Cabin Fever,'' a movie that finds an unusually potent blend of dread, gore and gallows humor, are as commonplace as rice, butter, cheese and broth.
But the director and producer Eli Roth, who wrote the story and collaborated on the screenplay with Randy Pearlman, has cooked up a tempting teens-in-the-woods bloodbath that suggests a ''Blair Witch Project'' with the blanks filled in, the camera stabilized and the story embellished with an evocative score (by Nathan Barr) whose shivery texture is spiced with the sounds of buzzing flies.
''Cabin Fever'' takes the notion of a rotting rural environment (in autumn), where a toxic, corpse-littered reservoir is the source for commercially marketed spring water, and makes it a metaphor for a contaminated world on the brink of a viral nightmare. That reservoir is the probable source of a contagious disease resembling the Ebola virus, which eventually afflicts all but one of the five brash teenagers who rent a cabin together for a weeklong party that quickly turns into a nightmare.
One reason ''Cabin Fever,'' which opens today nationwide, sustains such a palpable mood of foreboding until the end is that it stays away from the supernatural and makes minimal use of cheap shock effects. Because the horror doesn't emanate from a standardized special-effects hell, but from the poisoned land itself, it is all the more ominous.
The five friends who pile into a pickup truck and make their way over rutted muddy roads and backwoods trails to a snug log cabin in a desiccated forest make up the typical assortment of teenage types facing terror. The blond-surfer-wholesome Jeff (Joey Kern) and his sultry girlfriend, Marcy (Cerina Vincent), are hot-and-heavy sweethearts. The slightly nerdy Paul (Rider Strong) pines after Karen (Jordan Ladd), a friend since childhood, who teases him with the possibility of romance. Bert (James DeBello), who brings along a BB gun to shoot squirrels (''because they're gay,'' he sneers), is a dumb, beer-swilling lout with pyromaniacal tendencies.
The bad vibes begin at the general store where oddities like fox urine can be purchased and where Bert offends the locals by trying to steal a candy bar. When the long-haired wild child of a son of the storekeeper lunges at Paul and bites his hand, he is advised to wash it in the muddy creek out back.
Once in the woods, they encounter a profusely bleeding man who pleads for medical help. Terrified that they will catch his illness, the campers refuse, and he jumps in their truck and tries to flee. In the melee that ensues, he is shot, beaten and set on fire.
Creepy visitors materialize out of the woods. Another camper, Justin (David Kaufbird), accompanied by a vicious dog he calls Dr. Mambo, offers them marijuana. The beast later returns to menace the group, who fend him off with gunshots. Then there is Winston (Guiseppe Andrews), a leering young sheriff's deputy obsessed with partying, who talks like a gurgling libidinous half-wit. ''Cabin Fever'' subscribes wholeheartedly (if satirically) to the familiar horror movie vision of rural people as malevolent, demented hillbillies who regard suburban teenagers as prey.
The first teenager to fall ill is Karen, whom the others immediately quarantine by locking her in a shack. The disease eats its victims rapidly from inside out. Lesions are quickly followed by massive hemorrhaging. As one camper after another develops symptoms, the five friends panic and turn on each other. And because the acting is unusually solid, their desperate, each-man-for-himself behavior becomes a scary microcosm of mass hysteria and social chaos in the face of catastrophe.
''Cabin Fever'' 
~
Judging from the opening credits of ''Once Upon a Time in Mexico,'' Robert Rodriguez, whose antic spirit also animates the ''Spy Kids'' franchise, is both becomingly modest and a bit of a control freak. The movie, the latest in his series of gaudy post-modern folk ballads about a gun-toting guitarist (Antonio Banderas) known mainly as El (as in the), is unassumingly presented as a Robert Rodriguez flick. His technical contributions are enumerated in similarly stripped-down lingo. The credits for cinematography, editing and music are summed up as follows: shot, chopped and scored by Robert Rodriguez. This is sufficiently unusual -- and impressive -- to make the ''written and directed by'' credit seem like an afterthought.
Unfortunately, the movie itself confirms this impression. Mr. Rodriguez has a feverish, inventive eye, and an ability to infuse digital video, so often flat and grainy, with uncommon depth and luster. He can chop together an action sequence with eye-popping flair, and his soundtrack music, with its flamenco whispers and heavy metal screeches, is pretty good, too. The only thing missing is a coherent story -- or even, for that matter, an interesting idea for one. Even by the applicable standards of pulpy B-movie chaos, ''Once Upon a Time in Mexico,'' which opens today nationwide, is a noisy, unholy mess, with moments of wit and surprise that ultimately make its brutal tedium all the more disappointing.
In Hollywood in the middle months of 2003, wit and surprise are pretty much synonymous with Johnny Depp. Here, instead of the eyeliner he wore in ''Pirates of the Caribbean,'' Mr. Depp sports a variety of sunglasses, as well as different styles of facial hair when the moment suits. His character is a rogue C.I.A. agent stationed in Mexico: if his disguises, which include a prosthetic, spoon-clutching extra arm, didn't tip you off, then his T-shirt emblazoned with C.I.A. in large letters might. This is only one of several gag garments he wears: another shirt says ''I'm With Stupid,'' with an arrow pointing downward, and yet another says ''Yo Quiero Taco Bell.''
Speaking of which, the chihuahua who hawked that fast food chain's products so unavoidably a few years ago has apparently come out of retirement, though he does not, thankfully, have any lines. The dog is cradled in the loving arms of Mickey Rourke, who has been enjoying a bit of a comeback himself lately and pops up here in the middle of an intricate web of vendettas, double-crosses and well-known actors amusing themselves with big guns and funny accents.
And for a while, you might also find yourself amused by, in addition to Mr. Depp's precision riffing, Mr. Banderas's mannered soulfulness, by Willem Dafoe's thinly sliced jamon, by the many-gun salutes to Sergio Leone and John Woo, and by Salma Hayek's bellybutton. Ms. Hayek appears, throwing knives and sultry glances, in a series of flashbacks that are meant to explain El's vengeful state of mind. It seems she was his true love, done in by an unscrupulous rival, who is now involved in an elaborate plot to stage a coup d'état against the portly, courtly Mexican president, the mastermind of which is a diabolical drug kingpin (Mr. Dafoe). And the plot of this shaggy-dog shoot-'em-up is no less elaborate (and thoroughly nonsensical), drawing in a retired F.B.I. agent (Rubén Blades), a duplicitous Mexican Federale (Eva Mendes) and sundry other heavies and jefes.
None of whom have anywhere to go but down, preferably off a high adobe wall, in a hail of bullets. Mr. Rodriguez, while he gluts the audience's appetite for blood, fire and music, starves us for character, feeling and story. Even his most inventive sequences -- like the spectacle of Mr. Banderas and Ms. Hayek swinging down from a high window across air-conditioners and broken fire escapes, their wrists linked by a long, heavy chain -- feel disconnected and unmotivated. Who shackled them together? Why do they need to escape? What happened next? Since ''Once Upon a Time'' is, formally, more music video than feature film, such questions may be irrelevant. But in the end, the punched-up editing and vibrant color schemes start to grow tiresome, and Mr. Rodriguez, bored with his own gimmickry and completely out of ideas, responds by pushing the violence to needlessly grotesque extremes. Eyes are gouged out, legs are severed by gunfire and a bloody, fleshless face gapes on an operating table.
All in the name of patriotism, apparently. In the last shot, Mr. Banderas, over swooning and chattering guitars, kisses the Mexican flag, having saved the republic from mayhem -- at least until Mr. Rodriguez returns for more chopping and shooting.
''Once Upon a Time in Mexico''
~
''The Order,'' a murky ecclesiastical horror film, may be the nadir of the subgenre that produced ''The Exorcist'' (at its high end) and ''Stigmata'' (at its middle-to-low end). This is a movie so entranced by its own bogus solemnity that most of what passes for conversation is language warped into the heavy-breathing pontification of prophecy delivered in thudding Charlton Heston-style cadences.
The movie, written and directed by Brian Helgeland, isn't acted so much as intoned. If it has a theme, it's embodied in the declaration made by one of its many grim, unsmiling clerics: ''Knowledge is the enemy of faith.'' That's just the tip of the oratorical iceberg in a film in which even flowers take on sinister connotations. One character, an aspiring painter who has a thing for sunflowers, explains why she likes them. They're ''God's brilliant mistake,'' she says, because they're not really beautiful and resemble gaping mouths filled with crooked teeth.
The movie, which opened nationally yesterday, bears all the usual accouterments of the genre, applied with an indiscriminately heavy hand: scowling children who turn into demons in the middle of a cemetery when a cross is waved at them; and a soundtrack crowded with whispers, thunder claps, barking dogs, and ominous rattles and crashes that evoke a fetid underworld fretting for the chance to pounce on the living.
The protagonist, Alex (Heath Ledger), is a renegade Catholic priest in New York who, while investigating the apparent suicide of his Vatican mentor, Dominic (Francesco Carnelutti), discovers that the old cleric died after a ritual that involved a so-called Sin Eater. At the same time, Alex is tempted into a sexual relationship with Mara (Shannyn Sossamon), the sunflower girl, who just escaped from a mental hospital where she was confined after trying to kill Alex. (Please don't ask why.)
Skulking around the candlelighted attics and clammy church corners where most of this drama unfolds are Eden (Benno Furmann), the Mephistophelean Sin Eater, who in consuming the dying priest's sins left him with a smile on his face, and Driscoll (a cadaverous Peter Weller), an ambitious cardinal with cold, sneaky eyes.
Eden, exhausted from many centuries of Sin-Eating, is ready to retire, and without Alex's permission has picked him to be his heir and replacement. Their power struggle conjures up a trunkful of moldy special effects: sinister psychedelic head trips done on the cheap, and writhing smoky tendrils exchanged from body to body, along with the requisite blood-curdling howls.
The movie reunites Brian Helgeland, with Mr. Ledger, Ms. Sossamon, and Mark Addy, all of whom appeared in the filmmaker's last movie, ''A Knight's Tale.'' Mr. Addy, who plays Alex's best friend, Thomas, is the only character who begins to see through the mumbo jumbo that everyone takes with such deadly (and deadly boring) seriousness.
''The Order'' 
~
Should you choose to watch David Spade play the now grown up kiddie icon of a popular 1970's television sitcom in ''Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star,'' you may be nagged by the thought of how much funnier it might have been with Jim Carrey in the title role.
Mr. Spade is no comic ball of fire. Unlike Mr. Carrey, who even in his quieter moments suggests a hyperactive child on hold, Mr. Spade, with his lank blondish hair and sour expression, resembles an enervated Tom Petty nursing a hangover. Maintaining a winking distance from his comic persona, Mr. Spade radiates a cunning show-business cynicism that lets you know he's aware that he's slumming to make a buck.
His fallen star in ''Dickie Roberts,'' which opens today nationwide, is a hapless valet parker itching to make a comeback who goes to extreme lengths to land a juicy role in a Rob Reiner film. Never mind that the movie, as described, is a nauseating bowl of treacle about a man who discovers heaven in his own backyard. This is touted as the role that will do for Dickie what Private Maggio (in ''From Here to Eternity'') did for Frank Sinatra a half century ago.
When Mr. Reiner frets that Dickie never had the normal childhood needed for the role, Dickie pays the Finneys, a middle-class Los Angeles family, $20,000 to be his parents and give him what he never had. This involves, among other things, living briefly in a treehouse, which he turns into a disco, and being pushed around the streets of Los Angeles in a stroller.
In the longest-running gag, Dickie regularly forgets that he is supposed to be a child, and startles grownups and children alike with his withering, verbally sophisticated put-downs. The movie's funniest gag involves a white rabbit that belongs to the Finneys' hostile next-door neighbors, a family so unneighborly they complain about a tree that sheds leaves in their yard.
The movie, directed by Sam Weisman from a screenplay that Mr. Spade wrote with Fred Wolf, flagrantly tries to have its cake and eat it too. One moment it is snarky Hollywood satire laced with double-entendres about sex and drugs that push the limits of its PG-13 rating. (The slogan from Dickie's hit 70's show is a pun on an obscenity.) The next moment it turns saccharine as Dickie metamorphoses from creepy outsider to a hero in the eyes of the Finneys' too-smart, too-adorable children, Sam (Scott Terra) and Sally (Jenna Boyd).
As his research continues, Dickie falls in love with the children's neglected mother, Grace (Mary McCormack), whose husband, George (Craig Bierko), an avaricious used-car dealer, has a wandering eye for which he is severely punished at the end of the movie.
The Hollywood sendups are none too subtle. Jon Lovitz, as Dickie's beyond-boorish agent, keeps a sign on his desk that says, ''Let's do lunch,'' and falls all over himself to donate his vital organs to further his clients' careers. For years, Dickie has claimed to be the illegitimate son of David Soul from ''Starsky and Hutch,'' and at moments the movie turns into an encyclopedia of trivia about vintage sitcoms.
''Dickie Roberts'' saves its best moment for the final credits, when a chorus of real-life former child stars sings a defiant ''We Are the World''-style anthem, ''Child Stars on Your Television.'' As the camera pans from face to face (many are now unrecognizable), you can see the high cost of premature celebrity and the radical loss of innocence it entailed. But you can also sense a fierce tribal pride shared by these half-forgotten living-room icons who survived their early fame.
''Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star'' 
~
In ''Marci X,'' a cotton-candy farce about urban culture clash, Damon Wayans twinkles with goofy good humor in the role of Dr. S, a notoriously foul-mouthed rapper whose lyrics incite the wrath of Mary Ellen Spinkle (Christine Baranski), a strait-laced United States Senator on the warpath against smut.
As this Wicked Witch of Washington, Ms. Baranski, togged out in a severe black suit and single strand of pearls, does her familiar clench-jawed, flaring-eyed caricature of a sputtering moralist glaring down from a high horse. The character is hellbent on holding Congressional hearings, which threaten to destroy the media conglomerate that owns Dr. S's record company.
With his ever-sly sense of the absurd, Mr. Wayans makes his potentially nasty character a teddy bear beneath his rapper's shell. He has refined the knack of appearing sexy and ludicrous at the same time, and gives a performance of immense charm in a movie that doesn't know the meaning of street credibility. Too bad that the movie, which plays as though it were conceived well before the ascendance of Eminem, also seems hopelessly behind the curve.
''Marci X,'' which opened nationally yesterday, was written by Paul Rudnick (''Sister Act,'' ''In and Out''), who specializes in good-natured fantasies set in hyperactive never-never lands of jousting bon mots. As are Rudnick's other screenplays, ''Marci X'' is spiced with lightly barbed topical jokes and celebrity putdowns that strike glancing blows without breaking the skin.
The movie was directed by Richard Benjamin, who plays Ben Feld, the media mogul and philanthopist who owns Dr. S's record company and who becomes the main target of the senator's campaign. The title character is Ben's high-powered daughter (Lisa Kudrow), who vows to save her father's company when he is immobilized by a heart attack.
This is the kind of comedy in which the characters are construction-paper cutouts whose abrupt changes of heart are dictated entirely by the preposterous plot and not by psychological or social reality. Determinedly optimistic, the movie fantasizes a giddier, sweeter world where cultural antagonisms melt at the drop of a beat. When a clueless, uptight white person catches the rhythm and gets down, he or she is immediately dubbed a bone thug, and all is forgiven on both sides.
It's Marci's plan to win over Dr. S and convince him to apologize for using profanity on the MTV Music Awards. With three of her girlfriends, she attends one of his concerts, at which he mockingly dares her to come up with some rhymes on the spot. Superwoman that she is, Marci improvises a number (similar to Madonna's ''Vogue'') in which she drops the names of fashion designers and exalts ''the power of the purse;'' she wins over the crowd, with one exception: the rapper's jealous girlfriend, Yolanda (Paula Garces).
With songs by Marc Shaiman, the composer of ''Hairspray,'' and Mervyn Warren, ''Marci X'' has the tone, attitude and choreographed buoyancy of a Broadway musical, and the singalong rap songs don't aspire to radio-ready authenticity. The cleverest number is a candied ode to gay brotherhood performed by an 'N Sync-like group named Boyz R Us.
The movie 
~
Directed by Bala Rajashekaruni
Not rated, 100 minutes
''You know what's really cool?'' one sandy-haired young man says. ''They ride elephants in India.'' Another all-American boy tells Bharathi (Purva Bedi) that he has heard that people in her country eat with their fingers. Bharathi, a thoroughly Americanized young woman who says all she remembers about India is a scarcity of toilet paper, thought she was going to have fun at her boyfriend's birthday party. But she soon realizes that to his friends she's a curiosity, and to him she's a cultural-awareness project.
That dialogue gives you some idea of the oversimplification rampant in ''Green Card Fever,'' an amiable but highly didactic romantic drama filmed in the United States (Columbus, Ohio) in English. But it is a Hindi film in spirit.
Bharathi is not the film's central character. What's important are her changing feelings about Murali (Vikram Dasu), a recent Indian immigrant whose visa has expired and who is struggling to get his green card so he can stay in the United States. Before the birthday party incident, Bharathi looked down on him; afterward she feels a cultural bond that evolves into romance. The two meet at a dot-com matchmaking event that her traditional parents have dragged her to and where he is looking for work.
Thank goodness for Bharathi, because everything else in Murali's life is a disaster. He lives in a horrific apartment with three other men. His smooth, good-looking Indian-American lawyer (Deep Katdare) is condescending and overpriced and feels a certain superiority because he is involved with a redhead. The lawyer's grandfather (Subash Kundanmal), however, points out that the relationship doesn't change anything about him. ''So what if you have a white girlfriend?'' he says. ''Her race is not sexually transmitted to you.''
The expert (Kaizaad Kotwal) who promises to help Murali through the green card application process is a thief and a liar who keeps telling his clients, ''Learn to be patient and trust me.'' The man finds Murali what seems to be a day care baby-sitting job, but when Murali opens his pay envelope, the only thing inside is a MetroCard.
Ultimately there's an arrest, and the film, which opens today in the New York region, turns into a courtroom drama. This gives Murali the opportunity to make a witness-stand speech about an immigration system that is corrupt on both sides of the world.   ANITA GATES

~
Jackie Chan's career bifurcated around the time ''Rush Hour'' (1998) made him a star in American movies as well as in Asia, where he has been immensely popular for more than 20 years. Mr. Chan now has his Hollywood career (a third ''Rush Hour'' is already in the works), aimed at an international English-language audience, and his Hong Kong career, producing Chinese-language films for the Asian market (like ''The Accidental Spy'' in 2001).
''The Medallion'' is a moderately successful attempt to bring Mr. Chan's two careers together. A Hong Kong production filmed in English by the veteran Hong Kong director Gordon Chan (''Fist of Legend''), the film, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is intended for an international public but still retains some Hong Kong street credibility, thanks largely to the expert action sequences staged by Sammo Hung.
Mr. Hung, a martial arts star in his own right and a friend of Mr. Chan since their shared childhood in a training school for Peking Opera performers, still believes in actual martial artists practicing actual martial arts, as opposed to the digitally enhanced high jinks of ''The Matrix'' and its ilk. He has given Mr. Chan a couple of virtuoso sequences, beautifully framed and edited, showing that at 50 Mr. Chan can still fly through the air with the best of them.
The plot has Mr. Chan, as a Hong Kong police inspector, traveling to Ireland in search of the title object, a talisman that confers infinite strength and immortality on its possessor. It has been snatched by the international villain Snakehead (Julian Sands, in a highly campy performance), as has the boy (Alexander Bao) who is its rightful possessor. Mr. Chan is helped in his quest by a British supporting cast: Claire Forlani, Lee Evans and John Rhys-Davies, playing Interpol agents.
But as soon as the medallion appears, so do the digital maneuverings -- speeded-up movement, composite images, objects and people morphing into supernatural thingamajigs -- that undercut the genuine thrills of the genuine action.
The story line doesn't make much sense, perhaps because ''The Medallion'' was reduced to a brisk 89 minutes from 116 shortly before its release. Traces of vanished subplots remain, as when Mr. Evans's wife (another Hong Kong favorite, Christy Chung), apparently a simple Anglo-Asian homemaker, suddenly reveals her own refined martial arts skills as well as a secret closet full of high-tech weaponry. It's a stunning moment, but the other characters, apparently not easily impressed, just raise their eyebrows and move on.
''The Medallion'' 
~
The mildewed, rusted aroma that archaeologists encounter when unearthing a tomb is the same that will hit moviegoers attending ''Freddy vs. Jason,'' an idea whose time has come -- and gone.
This grunge match is far more horrible than horrifying. In this summer of sequels, the idea of trundling to a theater to see Robert Englund, returning as the razor-fingered Freddy Krueger, taking on the latest anonymous stuntman playing the hockey-masked slayer Jason Voorhees could only be linked to either a major home air-conditioning failure or an attempt to expose 1991's ''Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare'' as the deception it really was.
The only way that ''Freddy vs. Jason,'' which opens nationwide today, might have been any fun is if these two avengers from beyond the grave decided to team up and go after the cast of ''American Wedding.'' This dumb, only intermittently (though sometimes even intentionally) funny sequel presumes that since almost everything else from the 1980's has come back, why not the cynosures of the ''Nightmare on Elm Street'' and ''Friday the 13th'' movies? Yet people are also nostalgic for the world of four television networks, a young Macaulay Culkin and antitrust legislation. That doesn't mean they're coming back.
Mr. Englund returns as Freddy, the dream reaver who uses the fear in children's nocturnal flights of fancy as a source of energy; he functions on the premise that ''Monsters Inc.'' has already turned into a comedy. Striding into each shot with his hat rakishly pushed down, Freddy seems to have forgotten that his Mausoleum Rat Pack stylishness has already been worn thin to transparency by overuse. ''Freddy'' naïvely assumes that it will attract people who don't own VCR's and have never seen a ''Nightmare'' film. Or else it's betting that potential audiences will presume that any movie with ''Friday'' in its title has to star Ice Cube.
This movie expends so much energy setting up the back-story that it will leave those in attendance bored because the battle promised in the title doesn't start for more than an hour. Meanwhile, the residents of Santa Metro -- or whatever this Canadian hamlet standing in for a small American town is supposed to be called -- are eliminated one by one. They include a rip-off of Jason Mewes's on-screen persona in ''Jay and Silent Bob,'' as well as Kelly Rowland, whose stumbling performance rivals the tumble her solo CD took from the charts. (She alone keeps ''Freddy'' from being as white as the royalty issue of Vanity Fair.)
Freddy's smirky sauciness at least gives audiences something to root for, or against. The real problem is that Jason (played this time by Ken Kirzinger) is a nobody whose face has been hidden for 20 years. And the first ''Friday'' was released in 1980, so long ago that Kevin Bacon appears in it, and that appearance is not meant to be ironic. (The initial ''Nightmare,'' written and directed by Wes Craven, came out in 1984 and featured Johnny Depp.)
The best joke to result from a ''Friday'' movie didn't even come from one of the pictures. It is found in the poster for ''Friday the 13th VIII: Jason Takes Manhattan'' -- an ax slashes through the heart of an ''I   NY'' advertisement, with a hockey mask visible behind. So this is hardly a contest of personalities or, for that matter, wits. Most of the leaden wisecracks that Freddy gets off before dismembering victims are so rank you're not sure if you heard them here first or from that gubernatorial candidate, Arnold Schwarzenegger, on ''The Tonight Show.''
Ronny Yu, the director, has an enormous amount of fun with the climactic battle. The frenzied B-picture magic realism he brought to his 1993 action-dreamscape, ''The Bride With White Hair,'' with bodies hurtling across the wide screen, brings such insane liveliness to the movie that it's a shame the film waits until the last half-hour to pit the title characters against each other. A shot of Freddy vaulting out of a river in slow motion bathed in red light is as lovely and potent as anything the director has done, though he spills as much blood as all the previous ''Friday'' and ''Nightmare'' movies combined in getting there.
But by the time this struggle of forgotten behemoths, with its halfhearted denouement, arrives, no one will care. The ''Freddy vs. Jason'' concept first surfaced over a decade ago when both franchises had a trace of, well, blood, left. There will not be a sequel to this movie, but in the unlikely event that there is, maybe it can get a makeover from the Fab Five of ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy.'' Both Freddy and Jason are so last century.
''Freddy vs. Jason'' 
~
Boss Spearman (Robert Duvall) is the leader of a small band of cattlemen driving a herd across the West. He's gruff and impatient, but he's a good man. His sidekick, Charley Waite (Kevin Costner), is haunted by a violent, lawless past, but deep down, he's a good man, too. The two junior members of the crew, the burly Mose and the runty Button (Abraham Benrubi and Diego Luna), are rambunctious fellows, but they're both good men. Their canine companion, Tig, sure is a good dog.
When the cowboys are attacked by the minions of a local rancher -- a very bad man played, with a very broad brogue, by Michael Gambon -- they head into town to seek revenge. There, they encounter, amid the bad guys, some good folk, including Sue Barlow (Annette Bening), maiden sister of the local doctor. She's not so young anymore, but still, Sue is a good woman, and she knows that Charley, underneath his brooding exterior, is, in case you'd forgotten, a good man.
With so much virtue on display and talked about so earnestly, you might think that ''Open Range,'' which opens today nationwide, would be a good movie. It isn't. But, to be fair, it is not altogether terrible: Mr. Costner, who directed and co-produced in addition to starring, has studied the great old westerns closely, and his reverence pays off in the grandeur of the images (shot by James Muro) and the stately, deliberate pacing that leads up to the climactic gunfight. The story, written by Craig Storper, is simple and spare: a basic narrative of righteous vengeance, of necessary killin' -- without remorse and without the final g. But Mr. Costner's relentless, root-canal humorlessness turns what might have been an enjoyable B-picture throwback into a ponderous drag.
As an actor in other people's movies, Mr. Costner is at his best when he unleashes his raffish, reckless charm, letting the good man and the bad boy duke it out for pre-eminence. Under his own direction, though, his self-regarding piety always wins. Every pause, every gesture, every grimace is fraught with significance, so that even his cowboy reticence comes to seem like shameless showboating. Ms. Bening's performance, unfortunately, is well matched to Mr. Costner's; if the two of them were any more upstanding they'd be trees.
Luckily, some of the supporting performances send out occasional glimmers of levity. Mr. Duvall knows the difference between underacting and overacting, and knows when each is called for. He plays his part, a thin fantasy of crusty frontier benevolence, as if it were a mediocre poker hand, bluffing Boss into someone bigger and more exciting than he has any right to be. Michael Jeter, in one of his last movie performances, plays a stable keeper, a comical dingbat who turns out to be, wouldn't you know it, a good man.
''Open Range'' wants its notions of good and evil to have a primal, mythic force, but instead it feels both puffed up and simplistic. The bad rancher, whose greed leads him to massacre free-grazers like Boss and his men, rules the town like a petty dictator. The citizens are too cowed to resist, but before long, for instance, after Charley rescues a puppy from a flooded street, they strike up a quiet alliance with the vengeful cowboys.
Charley's past, which has been a source of shame and torment even after 10 years on the straight and narrow with Boss, turns out to have left him with some useful gunslinging skills. And Mr. Costner's immersion in the works of John Ford, Budd Boetticher and Sergio Leone gives the long, final shootout some elegance and authority, even if the outcome is hardly in doubt and the purpose difficult to discern.
''Open Range'' 
~
''Uptown Girls'' is the latest rhinestone-crusted fantasy in the booming Junior Miss niche market that might be called Princess because of its fawning adoration of overprivileged young bachelorettes and the luxuries their credit cards can fetch. Its bratty 22-year-old heroine, Molly (Brittany Murphy), is the orphaned daughter of rock royalty (her parents died in a plane crash), who lives in Manhattan in palatial squalor with her pet pig, Moo, and her dead father's guitar collection.
Molly is a font of consumer tips that might possibly be of use to other post-teen babes of leisure with nothing better to do than shop, go to nightclubs and fret over which handsome young man to take to bed. She insists, for instance, that sheets made of Egyptian cotton with a thread count of 900 (a set costs more than $1,300) are an irresistible lure to lovemaking once a man has felt their texture.
Sure enough, one touch of that cotton is enough to melt the resolve of Neal (Jesse Spencer), the cute Australian rock 'n' roller Molly meets at her ultra-glam surprise 22nd birthday party. Neal, who is in recovery from alcoholism, has also sworn to be celibate. But you know how it is with high thread counts and princesses accustomed to getting what they want. Those sheets end up making such a deep impression on Neal that he celebrates them in an original song.
In this standard variation of the princess myth, it takes a humbling fall from grace for Molly to gain a smidgen of soul and a glimpse of happily ever after. Once her obnoxiousness has been camouflaged by a thick glaze of saccharine, things magically work out, as they usually do for Hollywood princesses in distress.
Molly's ordeal begins when she is informed that her business manager has disappeared with $100 million of his clients' money, and she is in debt and facing eviction. She camps out with friends but proves to be an impossible roommate and ends up taking a job as a nanny to Ray (Dakota Fanning), a prim 8-year-old princess-in-waiting and raving hypochondriac who presides like a stern little general over her own Manhattan palace at Fifth Avenue and 81st Street.
Ray, who is as precise and orderly as Molly is slovenly, is also an orphan of sorts. Her icy mother, Roma (Heather Locklear), is far too busy pursuing a high-powered career in the music business (and the sexual opportunities it offers) to give Ray the time of day. Ray's father, who suffered a stroke, lies in a vegetative state attended by nurses.
''Uptown Girls'' evokes a post-''Sex and the City'' world of spoiled, shallow predators with little of the charm or humor of Carrie Bradshaw and her crew.
The movie, directed by Boaz Yakin (''Remember the Titans''), also owes a big debt to the British comedy series ''Absolutely Fabulous,'' which pits a precociously mature child (Ray listens to Mozart, studies ballet and talks in the meticulous cadences of a prep school head mistress) against a selfish hedonist who can't pick up after herself.
Ultimately Molly learns to care for others and helps Ray discover the weepy inner child hidden behind the pseudo-adult scold.
Ms. Murphy is more convincing as an acquisitive young princess than as the reformed, responsible Woman Who Cares she eventually becomes. The actress simply lacks the innate likability factor that makes you root for Julia Roberts and Reese Witherspoon, even when their characters are behaving badly.
Ms. Fanning deftly handles the one-note role of the serious little girl who learns to cry.
But the movie, which opens today nationwide, is fatally true to the hypocritical values of its niche market. While pretending to teach a lesson in compassion, it wallows in the perks of privilege. Its real message is that beauty, wealth, a shrewd fashion sense, expensive bed clothes and, above all, an ironclad sense of entitlement can help a girl conquer the world. That's all it takes.
''Uptown Girls'' 
~
With the surfing documentary ''Step Into Liquid,'' the filmmaker Dana Brown takes over the family business. His father is Bruce Brown, whose 1966 film, ''The Endless Summer,'' which followed a group of clean-cut surfing champions on a world tour, became one of the most successful documentaries of all time. The younger Mr. Brown was the co-writer and an associate producer on ''The Endless Summer II,'' a sequel released in 1994. With ''Step,'' he assumes the entire process, which includes writing, editing and delivering the casual, conversational narration that the senior Mr. Brown made a trademark of his films.
The personnel may be different, and the technology may have changed a bit since ''The Endless Summer'' (some of the new film was shot on celluloid, some on high-definition video), but the appeal of the format is essentially unchanged. With its astounding views of angry seascapes, its handsome young men (and a few women) poised atop 10-foot waves with the serenity and aplomb of an equestrian statue in Central Park, a nonstop soundtrack of old and new surfing songs (Richard Gibbs contributed an original score as well) and a pervasive philosophy that views life as fun and self-fulfillment as the highest good, what is there not to like?
Very little, as it turns out. As Mr. Brown tours the world, stopping in to visit the new breed of ''tow-in'' surfers in Australia, who use jet skis to catch waves far offshore, or dropping in on the unlikely but lively surfing scene in Sheboygan, Wis., where Lake Michigan throws off some minimally functional surf, he effortlessly recreates his father's world of endless leisure.
The surfers we meet may be serious young people, far from the beach-bum image of the American International beach pictures of the 1960's, but they all seem to exist in a kind of blissful opposition to the world of work and duty: a ''tribe,'' as Mr. Brown often describes them, whose members recognize one another by their restless sense of adventure and resistance to wearing shoes.
The sequences that Mr. Brown has brought home are seldom less than stunning, though a certain amount of repetitiveness sets in for those of us who are not sufficiently versed in the subtleties of the form to appreciate the finer points of the surfers' varied techniques. Still, ''Step Into Liquid,'' which opens today in Manhattan, Los Angeles and Hawaii, belongs to that category of films, like nature documentaries and some Andy Warhol movies, that are pleasantly boring. They are neither too thoughtful to demand a critical response, nor too complacent to invite ennui.
Like his father, Mr. Brown has the magical ability to take his public on a two-hour vacation. It's the next best thing to being there, and you don't need to worry about sand in your beer.
STEP INTO LIQUID
Written, directed and edited by Dana Brown; director of photography, John-Paul Beeghly; music by Richard Gibbs; produced by Mr. Beeghly; narrated by Mr. Brown; released by Artisan Entertainment. Running time: 88 minutes. This film is not rated.

~
The feature-film version of the 1970's cop series ''S.W.A.T.'' preserves the most memorable thing about the old television show: Barry DeVorzon's wah-wah crackle theme song. (Hearing constant variations on it as arranged by the gifted Elliot Goldenthal is hilarious.) Unfortunately the director, Clark Johnson, and a battery of writers have also retained the punitive monotony and barely coherent narrative thinness of the old show as well. This film evokes the feeling of wasting a rainy Saturday afternoon.
Probably the only reason for trying to make a movie of an old television show is to utilize its recognition factor while spinning it into something entirely different. And despite Mr. Johnson's touching generosity to the old series -- he even gives cameos to Steve Forrest and Rod Perry, two of its stars -- it's not as if anyone had any huge loyalty to the psycho-of-the-week drama of the show. It was just action fodder from Aaron Spelling, the man who was also responsible for ''Charlie's Angels.''
The ''S.W.A.T.'' film comes armed with a passable paranoid-action-picture premise that, if given the right amount of ferocity, could have played like a remake of Walter Hill's 1979 gangster-lean classic ''The Warriors.'' Here the foreign crime boss Alex Montel (Olivier Martinez) -- at least I think that what he's called, since he goes through more identity changes than Elizabeth Taylor -- is about to be extradited after leaving a trail of corpses and misery. Following a failed jail break -- after which Montel inexplicably gets to speak to the television cameras -- he offers ''a hundred meelleeeeon dollars to whoever gets me out of here.''
Law in Los Angeles then suddenly evaporates, with all of the city's thugs, gang members and semi-employed, dangerous-looking actors marshaling their forces to spring Montel. An elite S.W.A.T. team -- actually, a S.W.A.T. unit's S.W.A.T. unit -- has to transport this prisoner to a federal pen, the airport or another film remake of an old Aaron Spelling TV show; it's never entirely clear which. But ''S.W.A.T.,'' which opens nationwide today, suffers from a problem of emphasis. The filmmakers have top-loaded the movie with a back story that, sweetly, someone is under the illusion an audience would care about.
The film starts by introducing the Irish actor Colin Farrell -- employing a wobbly American accent that makes him sound like an international criminal a step ahead of the authorities -- as the S.W.A.T. officer Jim Street. It's another in his series of conflicted-cop roles; after an involvement with a mission that almost costs a hostage's life, Street is busted down to less glamorous duty.
While putting in his time, he meets Sgt. Hondo Harrelson (Samuel L. Jackson), who has been charged with assembling a new take-charge S.W.A.T. team. And Hondo enlists a group of officers -- Deacon Kaye (James Todd Smith a k a LL Cool J), Chris Sanchez (Michelle Rodriguez), T. J. McCabe (Josh Charles) and Michael Boxer (Brian Van Holt) -- so gung ho that in any other city they'd be subjected to steroid testing and probably eliminated from the force. But apparently the streets of Los Angeles call for just such jacked-up action, especially when Montel gently beseeches L.A.'s disenfranchised to set him free.
''Who do we have to paiyyy?'' he snarls to his lawyer. And when she lets him know bribery is out of the question in America, Montel hisses, ''Then who do we have to keeeel?''
The plot organization is meant to play to Mr. Johnson's strengths. As a director, his métier is character; he loves actors and has obviously prevailed on Mr. Jackson to dial down the patented Samuel L. flourishes. His absurdly named Hondo comes from the old television show (as do Street, Kaye and McCabe). Mr. Jackson's Rhythm Heritage confidence brings to mind the burbling funk of the ''S.W.A.T.'' theme song.
The director shows a marrow-deep confidence, too, on occasion in the scenes with the actors gabbing and getting to know one another, letting their defenses down. Yet the performances aren't informed by the affection he has for his cast.
As an actor Mr. Johnson was a regular on the television series ''Homicide''; he and Jon Polito were the first characters heard, and their goony squabbling set the tone for the show. There's no dialogue here as good as their arguing over Lincoln's assassination; much of the talk in this ''S.W.A.T.'' seems to have been lifted verbatim from crummy 70's cop shows or ''The Facts of Life.'' McCabe informs a date, ''I may work in the mud, but I certainly like to play in the clouds.''
Certainly Mr. Johnson doesn't have a real taste for action; much of the by-the-yard martial choreography is strictly by the book, as Hondo's martinet captain might say. The director almost seems to be rejecting the movie's right-wing politics, and his discomfort is palpable, like Danny Glover's slight hesitations in the ''Lethal Weapon'' movies.
''S.W.A.T.'' is mostly standard-issue muddle, right down to setting a crucial sequence in the Los Angeles subway. Most Angelenos probably think the subway was built for film crews; it's used more in the movies than in real life. And the underground scene takes so long, you may start to wonder if the cast will emerge in another Aaron Spelling product, ''Fantasy Island.'' That would make sense, since this movie is as natural as the virgin polyester fibers in Ricardo Montalban's suits.
''S.W.A.T.'' 
~
''You know, I thought I'd outgrown this kind of behavior,'' Jim (Jason Biggs) says about halfway through ''American Wedding,'' at which point you're likely to feel the same way. The sequel to ''American Pie'' and even more pathetically the sequel to ''American Pie 2,'' ''Wedding'' struggles so hard to be tasteless that it's almost quaint. (Don't presume such a remark to be a compliment; you'll see better film on ponds.)
The key word in that sentence, however, is ''almost,'' which could also be appended to the noun ''movie.'' In a summer of sequels that included follow-ups to ''Charlie's Angels,'' ''The Terminator'' and ''Legally Blond,'' ''Wedding'' is so reiterative that it suggests the kind of compulsive behavior that often requires psychiatric counseling. (What's next? ''Mayberry: C.S.I.''?) And this is keeping in mind that there were also a pair of ''Porky's'' sequels, the idiot cousins with which the ''Pie'' opuses have something in common.
In ''Wedding,'' which opens nationwide today, Jim has proposed to Michelle (Alyson Hannigan). Their friends show up to support the happy event -- actually, Jim's friends Paul (Eddie Kaye Thomas) and Kevin (Thomas Ian Nicholas), since Michelle's friends were apparently able to slip out of whatever obligations might have forced them to return for this picture.
Morale seems to be so low on the set that the cast might as well be clearing away shelf space at Blockbuster for the eventual spot of dishonor ''Wedding'' will assume.
Things have reached such a precipitous pitch that Stifler (Seann William Scott), the goat boy who annoys just about everyone, has been elevated to co-star visibility, a state that shows exactly what a turn this series has taken. Stifler pretends to be an intellectual yuppie in order to seduce Michelle's sister (January Jones), a young woman who happens to be named Cadence.
The only funny thing about this is that her parents (Fred Willard and Deborah Rush) have the nerve to be snooty.
The movie grinds slowly, inexorably toward the bawdy, bad-taste shenanigans that observe the decorum usually found only in the letters section of Penthouse Forum. The limp, boring jokes are relentless. The makers of ''Wedding'' have so effectively managed to make offensiveness seem tame that this could be subversion financed by the religious right.
Displaying the patience of Job is Eugene Levy, who returns as the wise but tightly wound character known as Jim's Dad, a move that was inspired casting in the first film and now seems to be taxing even Mr. Levy's professionalism. (This is the kind of thing he used to parody during his glory days on ''SCTV.'')
With any luck ''American Wedding'' should finally finish off the series.
And if any potential ''Project Greenlight'' contestants are watching, remember to remind that show's pit bull figure, Chris Moore, of his producer credit on this picture when he gives you a hard time.
''American Wedding'' 
~
When you hear that Campbell Scott is starring in Alan Rudolph's intensely appealing new domestic comedy, ''The Secret Lives of Dentists,'' your first response may be, why not? With his furtive voice and fluttering diction, Mr. Scott nearly always sounds as if he were slipping information under an embassy door; the lines waft angrily around his mouth before disappearing and leaving a whispery trace. Dave Hurst, the dentist he plays, works hard to keep his messy domestic life in order as he slaves away at a dental practice with his wife, Dana (Hope Davis), while murmuring about the existence he doesn't get to lead.
He doesn't seem to be doing a very good job of keeping things together, and Mr. Rudolph makes the chaos of middle-class life -- and the almost anachronistic longings Dave has over the path not taken -- the epicenter of ''Dentists.'' Mr. Scott's cautious warmth makes Dave a winningly complicated figure. Not so deep down -- there's really nothing deep about him -- he knows exactly how selfish his behavior is, but he can't quite help himself. It's more as if he won't help himself; he's too conditioned to be a brat, even around his children.
Like sands through the hourglass, Mr. Scott's performance indicates, so are the brays of our lives. The rhythm-and-blues standard ''Almost Grown'' could be Dave's theme song. Mr. Rudolph weaves a hilarious subtext -- the spoiled baby boomer who refuses to relinquish his time in the spotlight -- into a home-life scenario. This notion of nurturing one's inner infant keeps things ticking. Dave is suspicious that Dana is unfaithful, and slightly irritated by his three great daughters; the movie depicts warring among Dave and his girls in a subtle, daffy way.
Families in flux, nuclear and otherwise, are consistently at the heart of Mr. Rudolph's pictures anyway. In the spattered-picture art-world imbroglios of ''The Moderns,'' he treated 1920's Paris as if it were the house of the Borgias. His point there was that the Moderns were a family, too, with all of the same scabs of insecurity that kin have a special ability to pick away at.
But in ''Dentists,'' using Craig Lucas's deft adaptation of Jane Smiley's novella ''The Age of Grief'' as a backdrop, Mr. Rudolph employs a lightness of touch that's gracious in its generosity. Generally this director's affection for his actors is apparent.
In this instance there's a distinct heightening of the melodrama that grows more out of a love for the characters than for the performers. Dave is a twittering mass of anxiety, and Mr. Scott plays his neurotic correctness as if he were plucking an upright bass in an echo chamber. The throbbing notes reverberate throughout the Hurst household.
Dave's diva's sensibility is further echoed by Dana's performing in a local opera company, which he inflates into a subplot of infidelity and fantasies of vengeance like something out of Preston Sturges's ''Unfaithfully Yours.''
Denis Leary -- playing Slater, a bellicose, sneering, verbose patient -- materializes as a demon in Dave's fantasies. Slater gleefully stokes the worst in Dave, particularly when the entire family is struck down by a stomach virus, and Dave fades into a febrile state. There, he imagines that his receptionist (Robin Tunney) is cooing a torch song right into his melting brain. As photographed by Florian Ballhaus, Ms. Tunney, in a don't-touch-me red ribbon of a dress, is posed as lusciously as Lena Horne in ''Stormy Weather.''
So many sitcoms have twanged away at repressed daddy misbehavior that ''The Secret Lives of Dentists,'' which opens today in Manhattan, Los Angeles and Rhinebeck, N.Y., may seem like stale material. It's true that some of the film doesn't feel entirely new, and chunks of Dave's voice-over are a little overbearing. Yet it's the adult tone that Mr. Rudolph brings to the movie -- including a hint of an indulgent and slightly shamed simpatico with his protagonist -- that makes this picture more than a pile of nuked clichés.
''The Secret Lives of Dentists'' 
~
AT the peak of his celebrity in the late 1930's, Seabiscuit, a runty, crooked-legged racehorse rescued from obscurity by a California car dealer, was the most famous mammal in America, surpassing even Franklin D. Roosevelt in media attention and popular esteem. In her best-selling book, ''Seabiscuit: An American Legend,'' published two years ago, Laura Hillenbrand ascribed the horse's renown to several causes, including the marketing savvy of his owner, Charles Howard; the growth of a national mass culture fueled by rural electrification, photographic wire services and cheap radios; and the ardent identification of Depression-weary Americans with a scrappy, indomitable underdog.
The current wave of Seabiscuit mania, which crests today with the nationwide release of Gary Ross's film adaptation of Ms. Hillenbrand's book, may reflect a similar hunger for optimism and inspiration. It seems more likely, though, that Seabiscuit's 21st-century second act is primarily a result of Ms. Hillenbrand's skill as a historian and a storyteller. Her book, while saturated in fascinating, often arcane detail about the folkways of jockeys and the wisdom of trainers, is one of those rare chronicles of the past that manage to bridge the gap between the old days and the present, immersing the reader in the sounds and smells of the racetrack even as it illuminates a larger story of technological and social change.
Mr. Ross, whose interest in the subject was piqued long before the book's appearance, when he came across an article by Ms. Hillenbrand in American Heritage magazine, has done his best to preserve both the sweep of her narrative and its meticulousness. Inevitably, the story has been compressed to fit the dramatic conventions of a feature film; characters have been synthesized and subtle insights turned into neon signs.
But there can be no doubt that Mr. Ross, the writer of ''Big'' and ''Dave'' and the director of ''Pleasantville,'' has been faithful to his source. (What liberties he has taken are nothing compared with those in ''The Story of Seabiscuit,'' an engagingly fluffy picture from 1949, starring Shirley Temple, though not in the title role.) The main problem with ''Seabiscuit,'' indeed, is a surfeit of reverence. It turns the thrilling celebration of a collection of rambunctious, maverick characters into an exercise in high-minded, responsible sentimentality.
There has already been a PBS documentary about Seabiscuit (another one, on A&E, will be shown on Sunday), but Mr. Ross has nonetheless chosen to punctuate his film with lofty voiceovers read by the popular historian David McCullough, whose sonorous disquisitions accompany black-and-white archival photographs of automobile assembly lines and dust bowl refugees. The words and images tie the lives of Seabiscuit and his human handlers to the rise of the automobile and the ascendancy of the New Deal, but they feel both ponderous and glib, weighing down the more intimate human and equine dramas and denying the characters time to emerge as individuals. This is a shame, since the human cast includes some of the finest actors working in movies today.
As Charles Howard, Jeff Bridges shows some of the raffish, entrepreneurial charm that made Francis Ford Coppola's ''Tucker'' better than it had a right to be, and he rounds it off with a gentle melancholy. Howard, who made a fortune selling Buicks in post-earthquake San Francisco, lost a son in a car accident, a tragedy that hastened the collapse of his first marriage. (His second wife, Marcela, whom he met at a Tijuana racetrack, is played, with lovely Old Hollywood grace, by Elizabeth Banks.) The way Mr. Bridges carries Howard's grief in his eyes and shoulders makes the director's telegraphic reminders of his loss feel heavy-handed and superfluous. The score, a rare exercise in humorlessness by Randy Newman, has the same effect.
The real-life Howard had other children, but acknowledging them would have interfered with the movie's emotional core, which is the father-son relationship between Seabiscuit's owner and his principal jockey, Red Pollard (Tobey Maguire). As a teenager, Pollard, a naturally gifted horseman raised in a warm, book-loving family, is in effect sold into racetrack servitude by his destitute parents, and later rescued by Howard from the violent, seamy south-of-the-border racing demimonde. Mr. Maguire is hot-tempered and soulful, but the movie, impatient with any hint of subtext or psychological subtlety, reins in his scrappy, unpredictable energy.
As Tom Smith, Seabiscuit's taciturn, mysterious trainer -- a solitary Westerner more at home with horses than with people -- Chris Cooper fares somewhat better. He speaks in an affectless, hesitant drawl, and his distant manner suggests a wisdom that cannot be translated into human language. Smith is the link between the modern world of racing and the all-but-vanished world of the frontier, and Mr. Cooper's performance, the least showy in the film, is also the most resonant.
These actors are thoroughbreds, and you may find yourself wishing that Mr. Ross would open up and let them run. From time to time, ''Seabiscuit'' does shake off its air of sober restraint. The racing scenes are crisply edited and genuinely exciting, especially the climactic one-on-one grudge match between Seabiscuit and War Admiral, the Triple Crown winner whose owner, in black suit and bowler hat, represents East Coast plutocracy against Howard's self-made Western man of the people.
The rivalry between these two horses was itself a kind of class war: although Seabiscuit set speed records in a string of victories out West, he was, to the Eastern racing establishment, a ''glorified plater,'' too old and obscure to compete in their hallowed venues. Howard's relentless media campaign was ultimately successful, but Pollard suffered a calamitous injury shortly before the race. His friend and sometime rival, George Woolf (played by Gary Stevens, a real-life Hall of Fame jockey), rode Seabiscuit in front of 40,000 spectators at Baltimore's Pimlico racetrack.
In the movie, the first part of the race is conveyed by the voice of a radio announcer, accompanied by old photographs of people gathered around their radios, an elegant reminder of the way most Americans experienced the event at the time. But somehow we are never quite swept into the boisterous, democratic world of which Seabiscuit, in Ms. Hillenbrand's account, was the plucky, galloping embodiment.
William H. Macy, as a motor-mouthed radio broadcaster, lets loose a stream of hard-boiled 1930's wisecracking that offers relief from Mr. McCullough's sententiousness. Mr. Macy's character -- a Coen brothers-style confection named Tick-Tock McGlaughlin -- reminds us that Seabiscuit grew out of a restless, populist strain in American culture. ''Seabiscuit,'' decorous to a fault, pays tribute to that spirit without partaking of it.
''Seabiscuit'' 
~
The newest float in the summer sequel parade belongs to Lara Croft, the swashbuckling archaeologist and British aristocrat who rose to digital stardom as the protagonist of a pioneering video game.
Opening nationally today, ''Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life'' emerges as just one more formulaic action film as the title character bounces around the globe in a deadly treasure hunt. The object of her search is nothing less than the original Pandora's Box, which is revealed to be some sort of intergalactic surprise package that was once the source of all life on earth but now contains the very essence of death and evil.
That's exactly the sort of weapon of mass destruction that every conscientious dictator yearns for, and the film's principal villain, a renegade biochemist played with hammy élan by Ciaran Hinds, has assembled a group of bidders who include Asian despots, Serbian war criminals and inscrutable German businessmen.
Lara Croft's record on preserving important historical sites ranks with that of the Taliban; the new film finds her destroying both a long-lost Greek temple and a Chinese emperor's tomb in her quest. But she does cut a dashing figure in her silver Spandex action suit. As filled out by the sculptural beauty of Angelina Jolie, that silver suit seems to lie at the center of the game's adolescent appeal: it idealizes the female form while making it completely inaccessible, a kind of full-body chastity belt that both arouses and reassures.
Lara does have a romantic interest in the new film: an adventurer of dubious morals named Terry Sheridan, played by the up-and-coming Scottish actor Gerard Butler (who is to play the Phantom of the Opera in Joel Schumacher's forthcoming film of the musical). Lara reluctantly teams up with Terry, knowing that only he has the skills and ruthlessness to get the job done. But then there is the matter of their five-month, not-quite-extinguished love affair -- unfinished business that is meant to add an edge of tension to the proceedings but mainly serves as the occasion to revive such time-honored lines as ''We're two of a kind, you and I.''
As directed by Jan De Bont, whose 1994 ''Speed'' helped define the summer action blockbuster, ''Lara Croft'' lopes from one action set-piece to the next without developing any real rhythm or drive. Too many of the stunts are too obviously digitally enhanced to carry much sense of danger, though there is one breathtaking moment when Lara and Terry (or rather, their stunt doubles) jump from the top of a Hong Kong office tower wearing what seem to be scuba suits equipped with tiny wings. As they sail out over the harbor, ''Lara Croft'' briefly achieves the thrill and grandeur of genuine adventure.
''Lara Croft Tomb Raider: The Cradle of Life'' 
~
''Lucía, Lucía'' realizes that it is so lucky to have Cecilia Roth in the starring role that her character's name is repeated. Still, while recognizing its star's allure, this title isn't nearly as good as the Spanish version: ''The Cannibal's Daughter.'' The American twist suggests a lack of confidence in American audiences that the movie itself doesn't have.
''Lucía,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, has such a vortex of plot that the film begins to suck everything around it into a kind of black hole. It begins with Lucía narrating; she is about to board a plane in Mexico with her husband, Ramón, for a Brazilian vacation. He disappears with the tickets as the flight is being announced. Moments after she has begun her tale, she stops and tells us that she's already lying -- it's only about the date -- but she proves to be an unreliable narrator.
The last thing that a mystery like ''Lucía'' needs is a narrator who's exercising spin control over the plot. Lucía's backpedaling, which happens in a few instances, comes from the protagonist's simultaneously trying to make sense of her life and what has happened to her. After the initial shock of experiencing her husband's vanishing act wears off, Lucía is forced to recognize that her marriage hasn't been particularly happy for some time. Looking into the matter of Ramón gives some purpose to her life and perhaps will reignite her passions.
Ms. Roth's radiance and understanding of Lucía's emotional life gives this film a touch of necessary psychological accessibility. Movies of this subgenre -- in which the protagonist has to come to an understanding of herself by measuring her own life against her previous somnolent bourgeois existence -- can feel vapid, partly because the star has to awaken from her own passivity before our very eyes. Ms. Roth makes Lucía's state a willful ignorance instead, and her emerging recognition of her unhappiness, as new information comes to light, adds a dimension to the material.
It also has two men helping Lucía get to the bottom of things. The able, love-struck neighbors who lend a couple of hands are Félix (Carlos Álvarez Novoa), a battered and elderly former political firebrand who still has a bit of a fuse left, and Adrián (Kuno Becker), a 20-ish musician. Adrián is determined to prove his seriousness by quoting dense philosophical precepts at the most inopportune moments. This pair has a great moment when Félix leads them on a hijacked motorcycle during a chase.
There's also loving support from Héctor Ortega as the Cannibal -- Lucía's dad, an actor who once played a cannibal. Her mother (Margarita Isabel) has described married life as cohabiting with the living dead, the kind of thing that probably lingers with a little girl.
The director, Antonio Serrano, stages his wobbly adaptation of Rosa Montero's novel ''La Hija del Caníbal'' with lively, fast-moving efficiency. He gives the picture a mordantly piquant ambience, using the talents of the cinematographer, Xavier Pérez Grobet, and the production designer, Brigitte Broch, to add a swirling dreaminess as a contrast to the all-too-real danger facing Lucía as she gets closer to the truth.
And that truth turns out to be a very small and predictable revelation. Perhaps the denouement feels writ small because the movie, which works to take Lucía's mood-temperature, wallows in atmosphere. But despite a few nods to Pedro Almodóvar, who directed Ms. Roth in ''All About My Mother,'' Mr. Serrano is a commanding filmmaker who almost seems a little intolerant with the mechanism of the plot.
Ms. Roth, who reveals a certain edginess herself in addressing the narrative, gets to take a deep breath at the end of ''Lucía, Lucía.'' She deserves it because she's kept the picture going.
''Lucía, Lucía'' 
~
In the voice-over at the beginning of ''How to Deal,'' Halley, the 16-year-old heroine (Mandy Moore), complains about the frustrations of childhood: having to wear silly hats, not knowing what's in school cafeteria meatballs -- that kind of thing. Before long, these banal concerns will give way to much bigger ones for Halley and the people around her. These include, not quite in order: a divorce, a premature death, an unplanned pregnancy, a tumultuous engagement (of Halley's big sister, cutely played by Mary Catherine Garrison), a car accident, a bad New Year's Eve party, a first kiss and an undeserved grounding.
This is quite a lot for one young woman -- or one movie -- to bear. The pileup of significant events in ''How to Deal,'' which opens nationwide today, may be explained by the fact that it has been adapted, by Neena Beber, from two young-adult novels by Sarah Dessen. But this film's hectic, unwieldy plot, and the way it treats all of the occurrences listed above as more or less equivalent, are reminders that melodrama is the natural mode of adolescence.
''How to Deal'' is like a Douglas Sirk after-school special taking place in some idealized, generic American town. Nobody would know how to deal with such a string of tragedies and frustrations in real life, but realism is not what this movie is about. It is about the moods and feelings of Halley and the girls who will identify with her and, more generally, about the emotions of self-pity, longing, resentment and obstinacy that define teenage life. Those emotions generate the movie's plot, rather than arise from it, so to say that the story makes no sense proves to be an irrelevant complaint.
''How to Deal'' is an awkwardly directed, unevenly acted, sloppily written movie. But adolescence is a sloppy, ungainly, awkward time, and after a while the bad lighting, graceless editing, sluggish dialogue and self-conscious performances begin to seem like marks of authenticity, as if the movie had been made not just for and about teenagers, but by them.
Ms. Moore's limitations as an actress, apparent here as they were in ''A Walk to Remember,'' her earlier movie-star vehicle, only magnify her charm. When she is about to say something biting, she twitches her upper lip (also when she's angry). At moments of great anxiety, a crease appears between her neatly angled eyebrows. She does this with such candor and conviction as to make criticism sound ill-mannered.
In ''A Walk to Remember'' Ms. Moore played a strait-laced minister's daughter who reformed a local bad-boy and promptly went on to her eternal reward. Halley, in contrast, is a bit more rebellious, and not so obviously bound for martyrdom. Her boyfriend, Macon (Trent Ford), is not so much wayward as enigmatic, a cipher of pouty, inarticulate prettiness. Certainly, their relationship and its dramatic context are less programmatically wholesome than anything in ''Walk.''
Though Halley and Macon never go all the way, Halley does walk in on her best friend, Scarlett (Alexandra Holden), and Scarlett's boyfriend, having sex (an act that has melodramatically predictable consequences). Later, Halley's embittered mother (Allison Janney) lets fly with an expletive. Halley's grandmother (the wonderful Nina Foch) smokes a little marijuana. At an especially stressful moment, Halley herself smokes a cigarette.
All this brings the movie right up to the boundary between the PG-13 and the R ratings, which may strike some viewers as cynical and exploitative. But it seems more likely that Ms. Beber and the director, Clare Kilner, are trying to obey the arbitrary demands of the rating system while also dealing honestly with some of the issues young people face. And their struggle to be responsible as well as truthful mirrors Halley's own predicament. Their treatment of her sexuality -- a combination of skittishness and longing, of limit-testing and anxiety about the consequences -- is sensitive and well observed, though it may make some parents squirm.
But this is not a movie for parents (though it is not as antiparent as it might be, in part thanks to the skills of Ms. Janney and Peter Gallagher, playing her character's feckless disc-jockey ex-husband). The film's terms of reference are entirely Halley's, as are its imperfections and its hesitant, hazy insights. When you strip away the melodramatic contrivances, ''How to Deal'' is a sweet, self-serious and moderately silly story of first love. Mr. Ford looks so much like Ms. Moore -- the same floppy brown hair, the same slender profile, the same downcast eyes -- that Macon almost seems, literally, to be Halley's dream guy, the embodiment of her fantasies and inarticulate desires. And the movie succeeds by being true to these, rather than by being especially good.
''How to Deal'' 
~
Let's begin with a traffic report. This has been an unusually chaotic summer on the freeways and boulevards of South Florida and Southern California -- in the movies anyway. First there were Laurence Fishburne and Keanu Reeves somersaulting on top of a speeding semi in ''The Matrix Reloaded'' to the sound of grinding gears and complaining metal. This was followed in short order by the big chase at the end of ''Hollywood Homicide,'' the Mitsubishi mating dance in ''2 Fast 2 Furious'' and Arnold Schwarzenegger swinging from the end of a giant crane in ''Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines.''
Now, hoping to outdo them all in automotive wreckage and box office damage, here is ''Bad Boys II,'' in which a posse of bad guys commandeers a trailer loaded with new cars that they drive at high speed along a stretch of Miami highway, flinging the cargo onto the road behind them at Will Smith and Martin Lawrence, who are in furious pursuit. ''Did you see that?'' Mr. Lawrence exclaims as a Buick spirals overhead. To which Mr. Smith replies: ''They're throwing cars. How am I not going to see that?''
Later a different set of bad guys (not to be confused with the bad boys of the title, Mr. Smith and Mr. Lawrence, who are good guys) will do a similar trick, only with embalmed corpses, one of which is graphically decapitated by another vehicle. But perhaps it is time to cut away from the chase.
''Bad Boys II,'' in which Mr. Smith and Mr. Lawrence once again play a pair of Miami police detectives named Mike and Marcus, is the latest collaboration between Jerry Bruckheimer, who produced it, and Michael Bay, who directed. (Ron Shelton, director of the much better ''Hollywood Homicide,'' helped write the screenplay.) This one follows in the tradition of the earlier Bruckheimer-Bay pictures -- the first ''Bad Boys,'' ''The Rock,'' ''Armageddon'' and ''Pearl Harbor'' -- all of which made a lot of money and were otherwise pretty much worthless.
Mr. Bruckheimer, who is routinely identified in publicity material as ''the most successful producer of all time,'' is not a man for subtlety or for half measures. This summer he has, at least momentarily, outdone himself, releasing two movies -- ''Bad Boys II'' and ''Pirates of the Caribbean'' -- within 10 days. The two films have an aggregate running time just shy of five hours. (''Boys,'' at 144 minutes, is 11 minutes longer than ''Pirates.'') Anyone contemplating a double feature should come prepared with a large bottle of Tylenol. I can't say I recommend the experience, but it's your money, at least until Mr. Bruckheimer gets his hands on it.
Quite a bit was clearly spent on the assaultive, bombastic, and occasionally funny spectacle that is ''Bad Boys II.'' Mr. Bay may lack restraint (also taste, wit and shame), but he does have an undeniable flair for sleaze, noise and vulgarity. One of his most impressive feats is to film a nightclub rave scene so that the camera glides under the skirts and between the legs of the women. There is something leering and nasty about this that makes the more pervasive ogling in ''Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle'' seem downright wholesome.
A similarly cold, aggressive voyeurism characterizes the film's violence, which is relentless and often gruesome. Corpses are probed for drugs hidden inside them; a bucket of severed limbs, still dripping blood, is placed on a dining-room table. Several times Mr. Bay uses slow motion to track the course of a speeding bullet, climaxing with its explosive, splattery impact on a human body. David O. Russell used a similar effect in ''Three Kings'' as a graphic and terrifying illustration of what a gunshot can do. Here it is meant to produce a dumb, visceral, involuntary thrill. The audience at the screening I attended responded on cue to each exploding cranium and mangled tosro, with oohs and oofs and wows (as well as less printable interjections), and so, helplessly, did I.
If you calculate entertainment value as the ratio of such conditioned responses to the price of the ticket, ''Bad Boys II,'' which opens today nationwide, is undoubtedly a bargain. The last half-hour, during which an ornate Cuban villa and a hillside shantytown are demolished, bloats the experience into a super-size fast-food meal: thousands of useless calories are added at no extra cost (to the viewer, that is). Afterward you feel sluggish and glutted, groggy and numb.
The cast, in contrast, appear fit and energetic. The best moments come when Mr. Smith and Mr. Lawrence are permitted to pause from their action-hero duties and run their funny, unpredictable mouths. At one point, to no discernible narrative purpose, they team up to terrify a young man who has come to take Marcus's daughter on a date, and their parody of thuggish bravado seems like a sly sendup of the movie itself.
The running joke is that in the midst of fighting off heavily armed, vicious criminals, Mike and Marcus must deal with their volatile working relationship. Marcus says Mike has ''emotional anger issue problems,'' but Mike is, if anything, the more even-keeled of the two, despite Marcus's embrace of anger-management techniques and therapeutic nostrums. (Their put-upon captain, played by Joe Pantoliano, may be the most hot-tempered Buddhist this side of Steven Seagal).
The main difference between the partners is that Marcus is a family man (his infinitely patient wife is played, in too few scenes, by Teresa Randle), while Mike is, in his partner's words, ''a dog.'' He also happens to be sweet on Marcus's younger sister, Syd (Gabrielle Union), an undercover federal agent who is mixed up in their case, and whose abduction by the chief bad guy occasions the unauthorized invasion of Cuba at the end of the movie.
That bad guy (Jordi Mollà) is a walking ethnic cliché with a five-day stubble, an impenetrable accent, a closet full of white linen suits and a staff of oily henchmen. He also has a young daughter, whose death in that exploding villa is implied but not shown, which represents on the filmmakers' part either a rare exercise of tact or a failure of imagination.
''Bad Boys II'' 
~
The annals of science record several cases of twins who communicate, as children, by means of special languages incomprehensible to anyone but them. I have no idea if Mark and Michael Polish -- twin brothers whose third film, ''Northfork,'' opens today in New York, Chicago and Los Angeles -- are literal examples of this phenomenon, but their movies, which they write together and which Michael Polish directs, seem to draw on a private lexicon of images and metaphors.
While their work -- ''Twin Falls Idaho,'' ''Jackpot'' and now ''Northfork'' -- does show signs of various literary, visual and folkloric influences, the dreamy, elliptical way they weave together allusions and associations has an entrancing if somewhat opaque integrity. Their originality is unforced, and the logic of their stories is as sincere as it is strange.
''Northfork'' takes place in Montana in the 1950's as a squad of government officials, in trim charcoal suits and bulky black Fords, tries to evacuate the few remaining residents of a town scheduled for inundation by a new hydroelectric dam. The structure, with its hulking concrete edifice and enormous green turbines, has a spooky sublimity. Some of the townspeople refer to it as Northfork's tombstone, and it casts a funereal shadow over the place it will both memorialize and destroy, adding to the movie's somber, edge-of-the-grave atmosphere.
The wide, austere countryside, beautifully shot in washed-out CinemaScope (by M. David Mullen, who also worked with the Polishes on their previous features), is as still and silent as an old photograph, and the score (by Stuart Matthewman, another Polish brothers regular) is like an eerie electronic echo of Aaron Copland.
Among the people left in Northfork are a religious zealot with two wives and a homemade ark, a shaggy minister (Nick Nolte) and a young boy named Irwin (Duel Farnes) who has just been returned to the town orphanage because of his chronic illness. In his dreams (at least, I think they are his dreams), Irwin encounters four visiting angels (at least, I think they're meant to be angels) dressed in late-Victorian medicine-show costumes.
Among them are a silent cowboy (Ben Foster), a learned chatterbox with wooden hands and complicated eyeglasses (Anthony Edwards) and a regal hermaphrodite named Flower Hercules (Daryl Hannah). Provoked by their leader, Cup of Tea (Robin Sachs), they bicker about what to do with the boy, who says he is an angel himself, offering the scars on his back -- remnants of his amputated wings -- as proof. Meanwhile, the dark-suited government men (among them James Woods, Peter Coyote and Mark Polish) offer immaculate white wings as an incentive to leave and a means of escape.
Whether you are captivated by all this or merely baffled depends on how susceptible you are to the lyrical, wonder-cabinet mysticism of the movie's approach to the American past. Like another pair of filmmaking brothers, Joel and Ethan Coen, Mark and Michael Polish have a taste for odd, half-buried Americana. But their quiet, almost morose sensibility is miles away from the Coens' antic whimsy. At times their slow, deadpan style may remind you of David Lynch, but without the unnerving pyschological subtext, the undercurrents of dread, sex and mayhem, that lurk below the surface of Mr. Lynch's pictures. The filmmaker they are closest to may be Wim Wenders: the brothers share both his sentimental interest in mythic American landscapes and his sentimental interest in angels.
At once credulous and coy, ''Northfork'' refuses to mark the boundary between dream and reality, conjuring a seamless world in which every mundane detail carries an aura of hushed enchantment. The actors, especially Mr. Woods and Mr. Nolte, convey a haggard sorrow, but the movie is emotionally hermetic, leaving us no way into the emotions of the characters. The actors are ultimately part of the scenery, and what you remember are the haunting, carefully composed images, presented in a teasing, discontinuous sequence. There is nothing quite like this movie, and I'm not altogether sure there is much more to it than its lovely peculiarity. But at a moment when so many films strive to be obvious and interchangeable as possible, it is gratifying to find one that is puzzling, subtle and handmade.
''Northfork'' 
~
The listless movie adaptation of ''The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen'' has the sweat stains of wasted energy; it's dreary, yet frantic. The film is inspired by Alan Moore's comics of the same name, an imaginative and grisly take on Victorian heroes.
Convened to battle a world-threatening evil, the league is a group of tough, forgotten or ignored British loners brought together at the behest of the queen to stop this encroaching danger. In the director Stephen Norrington's film, it's a plot engineered by a villain known as the Fantom to sink Venice, and, yes, eventually conquer the world.
To foil this plot, the British Secret Service agent Sanderson Reed (Tom Goodman-Hill), working under the auspices of the agency head M (Richard Roxburgh), is determined to bring the league of misfit adventurers together. The first summoned is Allan Quatermain (Sean Connery), the legendary hunter and explorer who, though well past his prime, is still capable of some world-beating moves himself.
Quatermain serves as president of these immortals, a number that eventually includes the pirate Captain Nemo (Neseeruddin Shah) and an invisible man, Rodney Skinner (Tony Curran, using his voice wickedly well). As the plot thickens, others link up, like Mina Harker (Peta Wilson), a victim of Dracula who now uses blood-sucking prowess for good. She helps, um, seduce to the cause the dandyish Dorian Gray (Stuart Townsend), whose portrait makes him invulnerable in addition to being impervious to aging -- a witty turn that Oscar Wilde apparently had no interest in. The noble, rambunctious and innocent Tom Sawyer (Shane West), now an adult operative for the United States Secret Service, tosses his Stetson in.
Eventually the league tracks down its final inductee, Mr. Hyde (Jason Flemyng), who stalks the streets of Paris after fleeing London. Wearing him down until he becomes the docile Dr. Jekyll, the league members browbeat him into joining. Aboard Captain Nemo's magnificent blade of a submarine, the Nautilus, the team sets out on its mission to find the Fantom and end his perfidy. Between bouts of bickering and possible treachery, the league must try to combat the Fantom's futuristic inventions -- like tanks and flame-throwers -- with valor, daring and some of Nemo's own engineering marvels.
The film's screenplay by James Dale Robinson -- who toiled in comic books for some time himself -- takes pains to get the spirit of Mr. Moore's tale right. It's a formidable task, bringing the comics' dank, coruscating vision to the screen -- an abiding interest of the producer Don Murphy. Mr. Murphy was also responsible for a previous Moore adaptation, ''From Hell,'' featuring another Victorian misfit, Jack the Ripper. Mr. Moore's melancholic and apocalyptic stories have a dour, murderous humor drizzling through the depressive clouds. No one in comics is his equal at conjuring the end of the world, and in his stories -- from ''The Watchmen'' and ''V for Vendetta'' through ''League'' -- the world is awash in brutality and ugliness, deserving of doom. Mr. Moore's pleasure comes in serving up Old Testament balance.
The league of his comics falls into two piles. One group consists of victims, like the haunted, doddering Quatermain, who battles an opium habit and fears that he's too old to do much good, and Mina, whose past with vampires is only alluded to (and who leads the group with her cool British common sense and an implied death wish stemming from her reputation as a fallen woman). Or else, they're sly, amoral psychopaths, like the invisible man, who's introduced raping young women at a girls' school, and Hyde, a calculating man-beast who remembers every slight done to him or his alter ego. The vengeance he finally takes on the invisible man is horrific, a fate that will never make it from the page to the screen. No one is going to follow that story to the letter in making a big-budget action movie.
Mr. Norrington and Mr. Robinson show glimmers of faith in Mr. Moore's vision -- that paranoia, suspicion and resentment as well as other major character flaws are more a part of the league's bond than fighting for queen and country. There's a visual tribute, too: the long, dark hair and beard on the Fantom make this bad guy look like photos of the lanky, vaguely frightening Mr. Moore. The addition of Dorian Gray, who doesn't appear in the comics, and a joke about Captain Nemo's first mate are in keeping with Mr. Moore's pillaging of British public-domain figures with a tattered history. (Not all are public-domain. The movie's see-through hero has to be called an invisible man, or risk a battle not even Quatermain could win: a copyright lawsuit.)
But Mr. Moore's ''League'' is a meditation on ambiguity, something large-scale-action spectacles have shied away from since ''The Empire Strikes Back,'' which came so long ago it now actually feels like a legend from Victorian England. Mr. Norrington's movie, which opens nationwide today, suffers from its own anxieties -- a dread of being too literate, if not too literary. That's an unintentionally hilarious failing, given the material's leaning on bookish figures -- in their way, the Marvel comics of their time. It's hard not to notice the connection between Hyde and the Hulk, and how much more impressive the visual effects are in rendering Jekyll's brutish alter ago than Bruce Banner's big green side. (It's here that Mr. Norrington's background as a conceptual artist presents itself.)
Mr. Connery's choice to portray Quatermain as unflaggingly stalwart displays a lack of nuance, killing off any hint of subtext. The closest he comes to fallibility is a weary cantankerousness that registers more like hostility than weakness. The crushing obviousness he exerts amounts to a misunderstanding of his power and his presence: he was also an executive producer.
Obviously, Tom Sawyer was added as a nod to young American audiences, and Mr. West is likably reckless.
Despite the intentions to be reverent, Mr. Norrington, who did a ruthlessly elegant job directing ''Blade,'' is bound and gagged by the need of ''League'' to be quick and glib. Somehow, you sense that Fox would be happier calling this picture ''The Justice League of Extraordinary Gentlemen.'' As it stands, the movie is neither gentle nor extraordinary. ''Gentlemen'' may be a better movie than other Connery fantasy-action films like ''The Avengers,'' but then again a glass of muddy water looks good to someone just coming in from the desert.
''The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen'' 
~
About 20 minutes into ''I Capture the Castle,'' which concerns an eccentric English family living in a dank, picturesque stone ruin sometime in the 1930's, I realized that I had devised a mental shorthand for two of the main characters. The narrator, Cassandra, a smart, sensitive 17-year-old with straight hair and soft features, was the Kate Winslet sister. The older Rose, with curlier hair, a sharper face and a spikier attitude, was the Helena Bonham Carter sister. To mention this is of course unfair to Romola Garai and Rose Byrne, who play the two young women, but it does shed light on one of the frustrating -- or as the case may be, satisfying -- aspects of this movie, which is the sense that you've seen it before.
Still, as adapted by Heidi Thomas from the novel by Dodie Smith (best known as the author of ''101 Dalmatians'') and directed by Tim Fywell, the story of the Mortmain sisters, their impossible dad and their American suitors has some charms of its own. The father, an ambitious novelist played with morose delicacy by Bill Nighy, has removed his family to their crumbling castle where, he announces in a flashback, ''I shall write masterpieces.'' Instead he slides into writer's block, his wife dies, and the family (including a second wife, Topaz, played by Tara FitzGerald) slides into leaky bohemian penury.
Then along come the Americans, two brothers of contrasting temperament and their no-nonsense mother (Sinead Cusack), who set the household on its ear. They have come into possession of the neighboring country house and are thus the Mortmains' landlords.
A series of dinner parties and romantic entanglements ensue. Rose, tired of handmade or hand-me-down clothes (many of which her stepmother has dyed green) and scraped-together meals, begins digging for marital gold, gravitating toward Simon (Henry Thomas), the more sensitive, intellectual brother. Really, though, she seems better suited for Neil (Marc Blucas), who is brasher and better looking and who, with apologies, I would call the Brad Pitt brother. Anyway, Cassandra, who is adored by the local lad (Joe Sowerbutts) who helps out around the house, finds herself pulled this way and that by conflicting feelings.
Cassandra's coming of age is the film's main narrative thread, and Ms. Garai's performance, her first in a feature film, anchors ''I Capture the Castle,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, in a sympathetic, emotionally vivid character. The other performances are uneven, especially those of Mr. Blucas and Mr. Thomas, whose American accents sound put on (even though both are American) and who mouth the stylized, highly literary dialogue as if chewing on exotic and unpleasant delicacies.
On the other hand Mr. Nighy is perfectly convincing in the role of a tormented, depressive genius, and Ms. FitzGerald, in her smallish role, makes her easily mocked character, a compulsive serial muse, into a figure of integrity, even nobility. This is also the first feature for both Mr. Fywell and Ms. Thomas, whose previous collaboration was a version of ''Madame Bovary'' for British television, and the storytelling is a bit lumpy in places. But the evident affection that the filmmakers bear toward Smith's novel, and toward the odd, spirited people who inhabit it, gives the film a modest, hardworking appeal.
''I Capture the Castle'' 
~
What's bad? ''Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas,'' the newest animated feature with a boatload of celebrities slumming through another not-quite-thawed adventure story. To invoke the name of another underwhelming new film, ''Sinbad'' is legally bland.
It stars Brad Pitt, who is such an avatar of golden-haired perfection that he is more credible as a cartoon. But he is more believable as a cartoon in real life than he is here, where his underinflected, slightly toasted-sounding arrogance seems less than fitting for a lusty, robust hero and con man, and more in line with the stoner he played in ''True Romance.'' As it stands, children will gravitate more toward his antic, commanding and inventive sidekick dog than toward him.
Or toward Eris, the capricious god of Chaos (Michelle Pfeiffer), whose need to stir up trouble is not quite as grand as ''Sinbad'' requires. As Sinbad sails this film's marvelous computer-rendered seven seas on his mission, Eris conjures mischief. She is the otherworldly presence looming over the titular figure's peregrinations, and her mellifluous malevolence is a distinctive element.
She presides over a pack of mutated constellations and what appear to be astrological figures that didn't quite make the first cut; they are the Miss Congenialities of the zodiac. She unleashes these creatures, and others -- like a gigantic ice hawk, in the movie's most rousing action scene, which includes the standard anachronistic use of snowboarding -- because she cares enough to send the very beast.
Sinbad's mission? To return an enchanted artifact, the Book of Peace, that will prove the innocence of his childhood friend, Proteus (Joseph Fiennes), with whom he was recently reunited. Can Sinbad overcome his craven selfishness and bring back the Book of Peace? Will his flirtation with Proteus's fiancée, Marina (Catherine Zeta-Jones, doing an animated version of her feisty tomboy routine from ''The Mask of Zorro''), ruin his old buddy's impending marriage? Will even children sit still for this movie's abbreviated running time (83 minutes)? The last question will probably be the most suspenseful one about the film.
Most full-length animated films give the best material to the subsidiary characters, leaving the heroes to function as straight men charged with moving the plot forward. Members of Sinbad's crew get what pass for the laugh lines. The hilarity for adults may be in observing the mildewed homoeroticism between Sinbad and most of the guys, especially his burly Nubian first mate (Dennis Haysbert), who inspires a crack about nipples that poses more questions than it answers. Like his crew members, Sinbad was drawn as if he were meant to be part of the background. More thought and care were lavished on the design of the monsters than on the hand-drawn lead characters, who have the same kind of sketchy features as the stars of those animated Bible story cartoons sold on late-night infomercials.
The visual power of evil is chillingly evident when Sinbad and Marina find themselves transported to another dimension and a group of long-dead soldiers, realized through computer artistry, rise from a desert. This moment brings to mind the skeletal army that the renowned model animator Ray Harryhausen created for ''The Seventh Voyage of Sinbad'' in 1958. That film has its deficiencies, too, but it is far more entertaining than ''Sinbad: Legend of the Seven Seas''; it is certainly more deserving of the word legend.
''Sinbad'' 
~
In ''Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines,'' just as in ''T2'' a dozen years ago, the original T-1 killer cyborg from the future, played by Arnold Schwarzenegger, does battle on the streets of Los Angeles with an updated, sleeker, deadlier model. Last time, you may recall, it was the T-1000, played with metallic sangfroid by Robert Patrick. Now, in an apparent concession to the turbo-feminist lad-mag action-movie times, the state-of-the-art killer cyborg from the future is the T-X, who touches down on Rodeo Drive in the arresting and unclothed form of Kristanna Loken, and who goes about her subsequent business in a red leather pantsuit and a silver Lexus coupe.
The old-model Terminator, delivering his weary one-liners in that familiar Austro-Californian monotone, has his hands full with this limber, ruthless new machine, who has been sent back in time, as Mr. Schwarzenegger was in the first ''Terminator'' movie, to kill off the future leaders of human resistance to machine tyranny.
This movie, which will sneak into several theaters tonight in advance of its nationwide opening tomorrow, must struggle with its own potential obsolescence. The first installment in the franchise, directed by James Cameron and starring Linda Hamilton along with Mr. Schwarzenegger, is nearly 20 years old; its sequel was released when the current president's father was in the White House. The rapid evolution of special-effects technology since then, and the concurrent spread of multi-sequel blockbuster franchises, give those influential pictures a decidedly antique aura.
In part because of the example of ''Terminator 2,'' which was a pioneer in the use of computer-animated imagery in a live-action setting, sci-fi action movies have become ever more visually elaborate -- and also more pretentious. Next to the baroque postmodern pseudo-sophistication of the ''Matrix'' movies, which similarly explore the fate of humanity under threat of machine dominance, the new ''Terminator'' has a lumbering, literal-minded old-style feel.
Which is not, on balance, such a bad thing. Mr. Cameron has long since ascended from action auteur to king of the world, leaving his dueling robots and their human prey in the hands of Jonathan Mostow. Mr. Mostow's previous film was ''U-571,'' a highly competent exercise in that squarest of all action subgenres, the submarine movie. And if he lacks Mr. Cameron's unusual gift for finding human drama amid all the explosions, chases and collisions, Mr. Mostow does at least film the explosions, chases and collisions with professionalism and something like wit.
Though not, it must be said, with brevity. On my way into the screening room I was heartened to hear that the movie's running time was a relatively brisk 109 minutes. But the first big highway screech-and-bang sequence -- a big-wheeled ménage à trois with the good Terminator in a fire engine, the bad Terminatrix behind the wheel of a construction crane and the poor human afterthoughts in a swaybacked Toyota Tundra -- felt at least that long.
Afterward, if your auditory nerves have not sustained permanent damage, you will hear some necessary explanations, which complete the epic voice-over of the opening scenes. The heroic resistance of Sarah Connor (Ms. Hamilton) in ''T2'' did not prevent the apocalyptic ascent of the techno overlords, but only postponed it. Now, Sarah's son, John (Nick Stahl), the prophesied leader of the human resistance, is living ''off the grid,'' haunted by nightmarish visions of global catastrophe.
His designated love interest, played by Claire Danes, is Kate Brewster -- or, as she is marvelously described in the Warner Brothers press kit, ''unsuspecting veterinarian Kate Brewster.'' Unsuspecting has a disposable fiancé, who is quickly disposed of, and a military dad (just like Jennifer Connelly in ''The Hulk''), who is in charge of the high-tech weapons system that will soon take over the world, wipe out most of the human race and send killer cyborgs from the future to deal with the remnant. Unless of course Ms. Veterinarian and her future husband -- as opposed to her disposable fiancé -- can prevent all of this from happening.
I won't give away the ending. But even if I did, it wouldn't be the end of the world. For all the hype and the inevitable (and most likely short-term) box office bonanza, ''Terminator 3'' is essentially a B movie, content to be loud, dumb and obvious, and to leave the Great Ideas to bona fide public intellectuals like Keanu Reeves and the Hulk. Mr. Schwarzenegger, whose main contribution to American culture has been inspiring wicked parodies on ''Saturday Night Live'' and ''The Simpsons,'' acts (if you can call it that) with his usual leaden whimsy, manifesting the gift for uttering hard-to-forget, meaningless catchphrases that is most likely the wellspring of his blossoming reported desire to seek elective office in California.
This Terminator professes not to recall ever having said ''hasta la vista, baby,'' but he does let fly with gems like ''I'm back,'' ''She'll be back,'' and ''My database does not encompass the dynamics of human pair-bonding.'' He also says, ''You're terminated'' to his robot rival, perhaps testing out a slogan intended for poor Gray Davis. But that's the next sequel.
''Terminator 3'' 
~
''Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle'' is like eating a bowl of Honeycomb drenched in Red Bull -- a dizzying mouthful of unabashed silliness that leads to an equally precipitous crash once the buzz wears off after the film's first hour. Still, it would be fair to say that the movie is better than both the television show that inspired it and its film predecessor. That's half a compliment at best.
Keep in mind that the high point of the series was Farrah Fawcett riding a skateboard away from some heavily sideburned thugs. Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore and Lucy Liu return as clumsy Natalie, boy-crazy Dylan and semi-prim Alex, bouncing girl adventurers, in a sequel whose sugar-rush absurdity almost defeats the forces of logic, taste and conventional narrative. It is a defect that might undermine a lesser movie but that in this case proves to be as cheerfully, enjoyably humid as the first blast of summer light and heat.
''Angels,'' which opens nationwide today, is so much like a feature-length cartoon that you may find yourself sitting through the end credits waiting to see who provided the voices for the, if you'll pardon the expression, characters. The reward for your patience will be a music video with the Angels frolicking in wet and soapy slow motion, washing a Porsche as ''Anyway You Want It'' massages your temporal lobe.
The director, McG, and the writers inform the picture with an abiding sweetness by treating the Angels like a family. The disembodied Charlie -- whose voice, as in the television show, is suavely provided by John Forsythe -- is still a Daddy Figure. The terrific trio is enlisted to retrieve a pair of purloined silver rings that blow the cover of everyone in the federal witness protection program, with predictable lethal results. But what carries more weight than any threat to law and order -- which the Angels can overcome with one hand tucked into thongs behind their backs -- is peril to the bonds that hold the three together.
In ''Angels'' there are three looming perils to Charlie's brood. One is Madison Lee (Demi Moore), the retired Angel-gone-renegade who is saddled with providing the traditional danger to the forces of good. Another is Dylan's former lover, the Irish mob leader Seamus O'Grady (Justin Theroux), a color Xerox of Max Cady from ''Cape Fear'' -- complete with a tattoo covering his back and a score to settle. And perhaps the most insidious of all is Pete (Luke Wilson), who has just moved in with Natalie and may pop the question.
Amusingly, the movie hasn't nerve enough to deal with what Pete's presence really intimates: jealousy, especially since the Angels seem as happy to tumble into one another's embrace as the Aaron Spelling stablemates Starsky and Hutch did.
There is a more specific nonfamilial intrusion, the return of the silent but deadly Thin Man (Crispin Glover), who exploits Dylan's penchant for falling for the bad guy; this probably explains why she ended up with Tom Green in the first screen version of ''Angels.'' Family peeks in from another direction, too, as a new Bosley (the nubby-silk Bernie Mac) steps into the mix to replace his brother.
In one of the many nods to other movies, the Bosley clan is basically Steve Martin's family from ''The Jerk''; it turns out that the original Bos, played by Bill Murray in the last film, was adopted by a black family. And in ''Angels,'' Mama Bosley takes in another orphaned white boy, Max (Shia LaBeouf).
''Throttle'' seems to have so little confidence in the new Bosley that his subplot feels tacked on and condescending. The director isn't up to using Mr. Mac's acting talents as well as Steven Soderbergh did in ''Ocean's Eleven.''
The movie is so abundantly playful that when one of the characters, like Dylan, needs to register fear, her fright is too insubstantial to throw a shadow (though by now, if it hadn't been for her performance in ''Confessions of a Dangerous Mind,'' we'd have forgotten that Ms. Barrymore could even act). Obviously, the director chose not to take the high road of ratcheting up the intensity in making a movie inspired by a television, as with ''The Untouchables'' or ''The Fugitive.'' Rather, he went for the no-road approach: ''Angels'' was fired out of a cannon.
To that end, this sequel spends so much time keeping its stars airborne, suspended in kung-fu somersaults, back flips and throw-downs that appear to be a combination of Hong Kong action film and Herbal Essence commercial, that it seems to want you to believe they really are angels. The stunt performers get so much screen time they should be billed as co-stars.
The ''angels'' motif is often rendered visually, too: the Angels, including Ms. Moore, are frequenty given a shimmer that looks like a haloish backlight. The film is so thoroughly unapologetic about its riffing that the cameos (including the appearance of a totemic figure who, like Dylan, has a past) and the lively score (including updated versions of the Angels' theme and segue music) will make you smile as much as the Angels themselves.
There's something endearingly dopey about the picture's grown-up girl-power fantasies. The movie's conception of adulthood is to show that 40-ish Dark Angel, Madison, as being in such spectacular shape that she upstages the don't-dare-scratch-me red Ferrari she drives.
With such plot elements as a Justice Department official who has a private jet and a United States marshal (Robert Patrick) who drives a Maserati Spyder, the movie feels cobbled together by a particularly well-heeled 13-year-old. The cars -- which include another, vintage Ferrari, a 1967 GTO and an Aston-Martin DB5 -- are as lovingly photographed as the actors. The movie seems as if it's partly underwritten by Forza magazine.
An extreme motocross chase-fight scene -- daredevil motorbikes on rough-and-tumble cross-country ''tracks'' -- which qualifies as ''Ben-Hur'' for the ESPN2 crowd, explains the ''full throttle'' part of the title. The smirky sexuality and what passes for innuendo, with the Angels offering fully clothed lap dances while backed by the dance troupe Pussycat Dolls, is more of a tease than a ninth-grade first date.
In addition to lifts from ''The Jerk'' and ''Face-Off'' -- Madison keeps a pair of gold-plated automatics tucked in a holster behind her back like Nicolas Cage -- the movie rams home so many pop-culture quotes and cameos that it functions as a time capsule, an artifact grab that will probably be taught in American culture classes at Yale.
''Angels'' is a novelty of sorts: the first mass-market phenomenon that wouldn't cast a reflection if posed before a mirror. And that makes sense. There's something slightly vampiric about the way the movie drains the life fluids of everything that has come before it.
By the time the sugar rush of the first hour wears off, the movie falls back on a VH1 classic score to keep its twitching fingers from falling asleep. (The film's exhaustive shallowness is so apparent that the Edwyn Collins hit ''A Girl Like You'' almost registers as symbolism.) ''Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle'' is like digging through the world's grooviest thrift store treasures; even rummaging pirates won't care if the booty is on duty.
''Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle'' 
~
''Put your hands in the air and step away from the piña colada!''
That command is issued by a sexy young policewoman (Theresa San-Nicholas) to an abdominally sculptured promoter of whipped-cream bikini contests (Greg Siff) on a Florida beach near the end of ''From Justin to Kelly.'' The words are typical of what passes for dialogue in this flimsy cut-and-run movie musical spun off from the ''American Idol'' juggernaut.
Who at this point is not aware that Justin and Kelly are frizzy-haired Justin Guarini and pudding-faced Kelly Clarkson, the instant pop stars spawned by the first season of the world's most popular television talent show? And the release of ''From Justin to Kelly'' is perfectly timed to coincide with the show's newest statistical coup.
In Billboard this week, the first singles from the second season's finalists, Clay Aiken and Ruben Studdard, entered the Hot 100 chart at No. 1 and No. 2. Meanwhile Mr. Guarini's first CD hit the album chart at No. 20, while Ms. Clarkson's debut has soared past the million mark in sales and is holding its own at No. 13.
This multimedia payday recalls the furor over ''Saturday Night Fever'' more than two decades ago when the movie and soundtrack synergized into a commercial phenomenon. In its wildest dreams, ''From Justin to Kelly,'' in which Mr. Guarini and Ms. Clarkson make their screen debuts as sweethearts who hook up during a Florida spring break, would like to imagine itself as a contemporary hybrid of ''Saturday Night Fever'' and ''Grease.''
But any hopes that ''American Idol'' fever can turn Mr. Guarini and Ms. Clarkson into instant movie stars are dashed within minutes. They play cotton candy effigies of themselves named Kelly and Justin, and the best that can be said is that they don't embarrass themselves. Mr. Guarini's sidekicks, Brandon (Mr. Siff) and Eddie (Brian Dietzen), are an obnoxiously cocky ladies' man and a pasty-faced computer nerd in search of his cyber-dream girl.
Kelly is accompanied by blond, vixenish Alexa (Katherine Bailess) and Kaya (Anika Noni Rose), a frisky romantic who immediately hooks up with Carlos (Jason Yribar), a Hispanic waiter. A best friend from hell (the name, so redolent of ''Dynasty'' and ''Fatal Attraction,'' says it all), Alexa schemes to thwart Kelly's and Justin's potential romance by blitzing Justin with misleading text messages.
Mr. Guarini and Ms. Clarkson go through their paces like dutiful puppets, lip-synching and strenuously aerobicizing in the beach party dance sequences to numbers that run from sanitized rap to the strawberry sundae froth of several billowing love songs. To her credit, Ms. Clarkson infuses real heart into the ''American Idol'' generic vocal style, which institutionalizes and bleaches out a post-Whitney Houston pop-gospel. It's all about melisma, volume, pitch and the duration of notes. It almost goes without saying that there isn't smidgen of romantic chemistry between the ersatz lovebirds who once competed for the gold.
But for the panting masses of ''American Idol'' fans who imagine winning and going to live happily ever after in Lotusland, the message couldn't be clearer. You, too, might one day end up starring in the motion picture equivalent of Cheez Whiz.
''From Justin to Kelly'' 
~
Directed by Norton Virgien and John Eng
PG, 81 minutes
When studios start cross-breeding their franchises, it's usually a good sign that the properties involved are slowing down. It was true when Abbott and Costello met Frankenstein in 1948, and it is true today, as the Rugrats -- the lovable gang of animated toddlers from the long-running Nickelodeon cable series -- meet the Wild Thornberrys, a family of world explorers whose adventures are also documented on Nickelodeon.
The film, directed by Norton Virgien and John Eng, is titled ''Rugrats Go Wild,'' though perhaps a bit of exaggeration has crept in there. ''Rugrats Quietly Go About Their Business as Usual'' would be a more accurate if less elegant title for this minimally animated film, which finds the resourceful children and their helpless parents stranded on a deserted tropical island, after the charter boat hired by hapless Stu Pickles (voiced by Jack Riley) goes down.
The diaper-clad kids are led by Stu's tiny son, Tommy (voice of E. G. Daily), who has long been an admirer of the Thornberrys' nature documentaries on his favorite cable channel. He's learned a lot about leadership from the example of the Thornberry paterfamilias, Nigel, a British upper-class twit with a Terry-Thomas mustache and the voice of Tim Curry.
As luck would have it, the Thornberrys are on the island as well, searching for a rare white leopard they hope to film for their series. Nigel and his wife (Jodi Carlisle) trot off to the brush, leaving their teenage daughter, Debbie (Danielle Harris), who has managed to acquire a perfect Valley Girl accent during her world travels, in charge of her little sister, Eliza (Lacey Chabert), who for her part has the magical ability to speak to animals.
After a couple of reels of potty jokes, everyone has managed to get lost in the jungle. Nigel discovers the wandering Rugrat babies, but having been struck on the head in a fall, he has reverted to an infantile state himself and isn't able to do much for them. Meanwhile, Eliza has met the Rugrats' faithful dog, Spike, who now, thanks to Eliza's gifts, speaks with the voice of Bruce Willis. There's a lot of chasing around involving menacing wild animals and precipitous falls, but eventually -- to the tune of some heavily didactic moral underlining -- everyone learns to work together.
The suspense sequences in ''Rugrats Go Wild,'' which opens nationwide today, are intense enough to have earned the film a PG rating. But even with the filmmakers winking references to movies as diverse as ''Tea and Sympathy'' and ''Duck Soup,'' there is little here to hold the attention of anyone older than 9. For families in search of entertainment, it may be time to find Nemo again.
''Rugrats Go Wild'' 
~
In ''Hollywood Homicide'' Harrison Ford plays Joe Gavilan, a veteran Los Angeles detective with money troubles, three ex-wives and a goofy, undisciplined young partner. Gavilan, in other words, is a walking cop-movie cliché, something Mr. Ford seems happy to acknowledge.
He slips into the role as if it were a pair of well-worn loafers, the left inherited from Peter Falk, the right from Clint Eastwood, and then proceeds, with wry nonchalance, to tap-dance, shuffle and pirouette through his loosest, wittiest performance in years. It has been a long time since his gift for comedy -- evident in the first ''Star Wars'' and Indiana Jones pictures, and also in Mike Nichols's ''Working Girl'' -- has peeked out from behind that clenched, morose action-hero face. Mr. Ford can be as gruff, decisive or brave as a given dramatic situation demands, but he is also sarcastic, foolish and, in his laconic, leathery way, downright silly.
Gavilan is the kind of character that Ron Shelton, who directed ''Hollywood Homicide'' (and wrote it with Robert Souza), has made something of a specialty. Mr. Shelton's movies often show a mocking appreciation for underachieving, no-longer-young men whose failures and compromises give them a rough, self-deprecating wisdom and a slow-burning, grown-up charm. Kevin Costner, before he was swallowed up by his own self-righteousness, perfected this type in ''Bull Durham'' and revisited it in ''Tin Cup.'' In ''Dark Blue,'' released this year, Kurt Russell laid bare the vanity and corruption underneath the scruffy, hangdog charm of a similar kind of man and reminded the few people who saw the film that, when he feels like it, he can be as disciplined and magnetic as any actor his age.
Though ''Hollywood Homicide,'' which opens nationwide today, takes place, like ''Dark Blue,'' in the seamier sections of the Los Angeles Police Department's bureaucracy, it is a jauntier, breezier picture; it wears its cynicism about individual and institutional ethics lightly. Mr. Shelton has a sure, understated feel for the colliding, overlapping subcultures of Los Angeles, a city that, through his eyes, offers unlimited opportunities for envy, self-invention and delusional ambition. Everyone is pretending to be -- or wishing to be -- someone else.
Neither Gavilan nor his young partner, K. C. Calden (Josh Hartnett), is entirely satisfied with police work. Gavilan, who once attended a real estate seminar, juggles police professionalism with dubious deal making, while Calden moonlights as a yoga instructor and dreams, like every other halfway good-looking guy in town, of becoming an actor. Mr. Hartnett, in what might be called, thinking back on ''Bull Durham,'' the Tim Robbins protégé role, matches Mr. Ford's shambling irritability with a smooth, deceptive sweetness. Calden is an effortless seducer; his yoga students take his gentle dimness for spiritual elevation, and you can't be certain they're altogether wrong.
Gavilan and Calden's big case -- a quadruple homicide at a hip-hop club -- plunges them into the underside of the music business, which someone once said was invented to make the movie industry look good. Here, it is a demimonde of disposable celebrity and limitless greed, embodied by a label owner named Antoine Sartain (Isaiah Washington) who, when it comes to enforcing contracts, seems to think that executive is a synonym for executioner.
The plot is suitably, perhaps predictably intricate. One bad cop (Bruce Greenwood) is after Gavilan's badge; another (Dwight Yoakam) may have been involved in the murder of Calden's father, who was also a police officer. The various record-industry and law-enforcement bad guys are linked in a brutal conspiracy that you will unravel well before Gavilan and Calden do.
But the plot is not really the point. It is, instead, the hammered together frame that contains a motley collage of riffs, sketches and variations on some of Mr. Shelton's favorite themes, including the absurdity and nobility of manhood, the sex appeal of mature women and the varieties of interracial and intergenerational misunderstanding.
There are scenes that appear to have been as much fun to write and to shoot as they are to watch: a foot and pedal-boat chase across a muddy canal; parallel interrogations derailed by yoga poses and ringing cellphones; and anything calling for the presence of Lena Olin (as Gavilan's lover, a radio psychic) or Lolita Davidovich (as a madam).
Really, though, there are too many deft grace notes and underplayed jokes to take in at a single viewing. Mr. Shelton is a master of the telling, offhand detail. Gavilan's cellphone plays the opening bars of ''My Girl,'' a choice that marks him as an old-school sentimentalist. Later, he dances alone to ''The Tracks of My Tears,'' prefiguring an astounding cameo from Smokey Robinson himself, playing an impatient cabdriver.
Gavilan's protestations that he just doesn't get hip-hop may be stiff-necked Motown nostalgia or Columbo-style guilelessness. Or it may be, as Calden points out, that he's not supposed to get it. Mr. Shelton does, however, selecting a fine sampling of East and West Coast beats for the soundtrack and bringing on rap world figures like Kurupt and Master P in supporting roles. (Something of an old-school soul man himself, Mr. Shelton also contrives to have Gladys Knight answer a door when Gavilan knocks on it.)
A less confident, less devil-may-care filmmaker might have wrapped it all up with a parade of revelations and just deserts, but Mr. Shelton seems to trust his audience to figure out the plot points and so treats us, at the end, to a long, crazy car chase, a carnival of slapstick mayhem complete with real estate negotiations, dueling television helicopters and Robert Wagner splattered with wet concrete as he prepares to christen his star on the Walk of Fame outside Grauman's Chinese Theater.
''Hollywood Homicide'' 
~
Directed by Troy Miller
PG-13, 82 minutes
Arriving just in time to put the lie to the notion that this is a summer full of nothing but sequels is ''Dumb and Dumberer: When Harry Met Lloyd.'' Directed by Troy Miller (''Jack Frost''), the film is, in fact, a prequel, to resurrect an already antique neologism (coined, if memory serves, for the 1979 ''Butch and Sundance: The Early Days'').
To the extent that it possesses a narrative line at all, ''Dumb and Dumberer,'' which opens today nationwide, tells the story of the fateful first encounter between Harry Dunne and Lloyd Christmas, the two lovable morons of the 1994 runaway hit ''Dumb and Dumber,'' in which they were played, respectively, by Jeff Daniels and Jim Carrey.
Set in a high school in Providence, R.I., in the 1980's, ''Dumb and Dumberer'' imagines young Lloyd as the son of the school custodian (Luis Guzmán) and Harry as the home-schooled offspring of a single mom (Mimi Rogers), making his debut in public education. They meet when, turning a corner at high speed, Lloyd runs into Harry and knocks him down, chipping his front tooth on Harry's rock-solid forehead.
The buddies are recruited into a special education class being run as a grant-grabbing scam by the high school's corrupt principal (the reliable Eugene Levy) and his mistress, the dimwitted matron of the school cafeteria (Cheri Oteri). Jessica (Rachel Nichols), a blond knockout who is the star reporter of the school paper, smells a rat, and enlists the boys in her campaign to bring the principal to justice.
Credit must be given to the casting director, John Papsidera, for finding two young actors, Derek Richardson as Harry and Eric Christian Olsen as Lloyd, who bear amazing resemblances to their adult counterparts. With his hair dyed black and trimmed in the bowl cut Mr. Carrey made famous, Mr. Olsen is particularly convincing as the young Lloyd, drawing on the same reservoir of Jerry Lewis grimaces that inspired Mr. Carrey in the initial outing.
Unfortunately, Mr. Miller and his writing partner, Robert Brener, do not do nearly as convincing an impersonation of Peter and Bobby Farrelly, the brothers who wrote and directed ''Dumb and Dumber'' and have since gone on to bigger budgets and higher fees (''Me, Myself and Irene,'' ''Shallow Hal''), if not necessarily better work.
While ''Dumb and Dumber'' possessed a bracing, genuine vulgarity, this new film is more often merely disgusting as it piles up jokes involving various bodily discharges and the unpleasant things that can be done with them. The Farrelly brothers appear to have had no involvement with this project at all, and judging by how conspicuously low their union-mandated credit appears in the end titles -- ''based on characters created by'' -- it looks as if they have done their best to distance themselves from it. The impulse is understandable.
''Dumb and Dumberer: When Harry Met Lloyd'' 
~
The action-comedy heist film ''The Hard Word'' is amusingly gamy, an anecdotal crime film that's an antidote to the pile of overly slick robbery pictures of the past few years. Unlike such gaudy, gleaming toys -- in which the hoods have access to so many devices and fleets of automobiles that you wonder why they couldn't just retire on the resources they're spending on pulling off the crimes -- ''The Hard Word'' is set in an Australian showroom of broken dreams.
At one level the film, which opens today in Manhattan, is simply a series of snatches and betrayals, with a couple of surprises that aren't terribly hard to figure out. But it enjoys the asset of a grimy, slightly mildewy atmosphere -- a believably dank ripeness reminiscent of the British crime films of the 1960's. It also offers a few tart rip-off scenes and a performance of back-alley bravura by Guy Pearce in the lead.
It starts off with a dreamy-blue wide-screen expanse of sky, the optimistic blue of a 1975 leisure suit. And the camera pans down into a noisy, all-elbows prison basketball game -- the kind of sweaty, bloody event that would open the wrestling czar Vince McMahon's nostrils with admiration. It is the writer and director Scott Roberts's way of setting a tone. A few feet away, inside the prison library, Dale (Mr. Pearce), the thinking man's hood, is involved in a conversation that wouldn't be out of place in the Attica Review of Books; trying to boil down Philip Roth into flash-card terms.
Dale has the ability to cut through confusion with a swift, amused turn of phrase; he could be the Elmore Leonard of cons. Mr. Roberts's inspiration is definitely the world of Mr. Leonard, the master crime novelist, and Dale is the criminal who may be a little too smart for his own good but loves what he does.
Mr. Pearce gets to use his own accent, which allows him to finesse the performance with a growly chewing of his vowels; Dale knows exactly how to use his voice. A leading man who likes to hide under character-actor flourishes, Mr. Pearce this time gives himself a bottom dweller's thrusting lower jaw, ruminative dark circles under his eyes and, apparently, Robert Carlyle's nose. It adds up to a cheekiness he hasn't often shown.
Dale is the oldest of the Twentyman brothers, three accomplished thieves who are about to be set free. His youngest brother, Shane (Joel Edgerton), has spent more time on tummy crunches than explaining the ins and outs of literature at a prison book club. He looks as if he'd hit someone who brought up Philip Roth, and his indiscriminate temper flares when he doesn't get what he ordered -- like a Pepsi instead of a Coke. The middle brother, Mal (Damien Richardson), has made a career for himself in the joint as a butcher. In fact, the prison lives of the Twentymans are so evolved that it seems they might be better suited for an existence behind bars.
But their lawyer, Frank (Robert Taylor), who's arranging their bail, has also set up a bank job for them. In action, they're as comfortable as they were biding their time in prison. They're like an Aussie version of a backwoods family out of a novel by Jim Thompson, or Clyde Edgerton. They're set up to take a fall by the scheming, perfectly exfoliated Frank. It's even clear that the plan included Dale's wife, Carol (Rachel Griffiths), a femme fatale who looks as if she peroxided her hair in the back of a moving car. The rest of ''The Hard Word'' involves the brothers' being pulled into another robbery after getting out of jail and using it to plot their comeback.
Mr. Roberts has a tough streak in him; there's enough arterial spray in ''The Hard Word'' to make you worry that the able cinematographer Brian Breheny might slip on the blood and entrails. But the picture has a spiky, efficient hilarity, and the director uses his actors well. Mr. Pearce's work has a grungy appeal; with his low-life alertness, he could be a coelacanth, popping up to take a bite out of the fish floating overhead. In an American picture he could just as easily have played the spineless carnivore lawyer Frank, though using Mr. Taylor as a villain is a nice touch, especially since he has the lightweight spoiled Etonesque looks of the young Roger Moore.
What's really worthy of attention in ''The Last Word' is Ms. Griffiths. Sometimes on ''Six Feet Under,'' affecting an American accent, she can't quite get the emphasis of a sentence right, and it sounds as if she's trying to force the words out before her mood stabilizers kick in. As Carol, the duplicitous wife, she uses a roughhouse natural accent that purrs with oblivious cruelty, providing a dirty kick.
You can see why men who should know better, like Frank and Dale, trail after her like ducklings.
''The Hard Word'' 
~
''2 Fast 2 Furious,'' a new seatbelt-awareness film that opens nationwide today, features two very fine and touching performances, both of them by cars. Indeed, the movie, directed by John Singleton from a script by Michael Brandt and Derek Haas, can be seen as something of a love story, in which a pair of tricked-out Mitsubishis -- a cute purple Spider convertible and a sinewy yellow Evolution -- carry out a high-speed courtship as they dart and frolic along the highways of South Florida. Then, at what should be their moment of consummation, these two frisky vehicles are replaced by a pair of domestic hotrods (an orange Dodge and a blue Chevy), one of which crashes onto the deck of a yacht.
Unfortunately, all of these supremely expressive vehicles come equipped with drivers, principally a pair of crash-test dummies played by Paul Walker and Tyrese, whose low-gear dialogue makes the whine of engines sound like the highest poetry.
To make a dumb story short, the two of them, boyhood friends who have grown up to be an ex-cop (Mr. Walker) and an ex-con (Tyrese), go undercover to help a sexy customs agent (Eva Mendes) snare a drug kingpin (Cole Hauser). The kingpin is eager to hire street racers to ferry his ill-gotten gains from one place to another, perhaps because brightly painted flame-shooting cars traveling at double the speed limit are unlikely to attract the attention of law enforcement. He might have done better with Buick-driving retirees, or carrier pigeons, but that would have been a different movie.
This one is a sequel to ''The Fast and The Furious,'' the success of which helped propel Vin Diesel to stardom. Mr. Diesel and Rob Cohen, who directed the first movie, have moved on to the ''XXX'' franchise, leaving their successors choking on fumes. ''2 Fast 2 Furious'' is among the most lethargic action movies I have ever seen: when Mr. Walker and Tyrese are not driving, it might as well be called ''2 Slow 2 Tedious,'' since the script shows all the energy and sophistication of an old episode of TJ Hooker.
But even the racing and chasing, which is what really matters in a picture like this, is clumsy and lame, about as viscerally exciting as the masterworks of eight-millimeter instructional cinema I was forced to watch in driver ed class back in high school. The basic editing scheme suggests a how-to video on manual shifting techniques. Step 1: depress the clutch. Step 2: yank the gearshift. Step 3: grimace and shout in the ethnic slang idiom of your choice. Repeat as necessary until you crash into something or find it advisable to activate the nitrogen-powered booster rockets, now available from your dealer as part of the special doofus hotrod sport package.
Mr. Singleton, whose limitations as an action director were also on display in the remake of ''Shaft,'' at least seems to respect the beauty of cars, and also -- though respect may be precisely the wrong word -- that of women. Ms. Mendes and Devon Aoki have some lines to say, and Ms. Aoki is even permitted to drive. But mostly the women, like the cars, are around to fuel adolescent male fantasies and are similarly ogled, at leeringly low angles, by the camera.
''2 Fast 2 Furious'' 
~
I had car trouble in West Virginia once. The experience (some nice people in a trailer let us use their telephone to call Hertz) was not as eventful as that of the attractive young characters in Rob Schmidt's ''Wrong Turn,'' but it was also a lot less tedious.
Mr. Schmidt's lazy would-be horror film stars Desmond Harrington as Chris, a young professional who runs into a traffic jam on his way to an important interview in Raleigh, N.C. His cellphone doesn't work here, in what the movie identifies as Greenbrier Backcountry, W.Va., and neither does the telephone at the nearest gas station, which is attended by a filthy, grizzled, almost toothless old man who seems overwhelmed by a lifetime of inertia. So Chris takes a look at a map and decides to take a back road.
En route he runs head on into a white S.U.V. parked in the middle of a dirt road because it has just run over a stretch of barbed wire. Happily, this vehicle is inhabited by five people just as young and attractive as Chris: two couples and, conveniently, an extra young woman (Eliza Dushku). What none of these carefree types know is that they're surrounded by mentally retarded homicidal maniacs.
In this part of the world there has been so much inbreeding that some people have become grotesque mutants who have turned to cannibalism, which may explain why there have been so many missing-person cases in the area. We know this because the filmmakers have shown us newspaper clippings on those subjects during the opening credits.
Over the generations, these men (and one does wonder, where are their womenfolk?) have apparently lost the capacity for speech but they can still drive trucks and operate firearms. They seem to prefer hatchets and bows and arrows, though.
In the tradition of teenage-oriented slasher movies, the ''sinners'' are the first to go. In this case, that means the couple who stay behind to watch the cars, smoke marijuana and have outdoor sex while the others go for help.
The film does achieve a couple of good, unexpected scares. And to the credit of Alan B. McElroy's script, these characters don't say nearly as many preposterous things as young people often do in this genre. But somebody has to refer to ''Deliverance,'' the film in which Ned Beatty is raped by hillbilly sodomites, and the honor goes to Scott (Jeremy Sisto). He's reminded of it when they come upon a dilapidated house with a front yard full of rusting old cars and trucks. There is, however, no sign of banjos.
''Wrong Turn'' 
~
One of the sillier but more engaging conventions of the contemporary caper film is to imagine that a dream team of crooked techno-wizards, each a quirky genius who takes pride in his craft, can mesh like a perfectly functioning machine and accomplish miraculous feats of larceny. The standard movie heist is a race against time that involves at least two spectacular chases and that is often capped with a tricky surprise ending. True to tradition, the crew of ''The Italian Job,'' facing punishing deadlines, carries off its high-tech games of take-the-money-and-run with a cool, professional bravado.
If this sleek, ticking remake of the 1969 film starring Michael Caine and Noël Coward follows the conventions of the genre without major deviations, it still puts together the familiar elements with an impressive skill and considerable wit. With its impeccable timing, steady kinetic drive and superbly choreographed chase sequences through the canals of Venice and the streets of Los Angeles, the movie, directed by F. Gary Gray, feels a like smooth, exciting whoosh down a ski slope.
The screenplay by Donna Powers and Wayne Powers insinuates just enough character detail to render its conspirators slightly more than skin-deep. And as is often the case with the caper genre, the criminals are painted as likable rogues whom you're encouraged to champion simply because they're good at what they do.
This particular variation on the caper formula is a revenge drama in which some honorable thieves team up to recover their stolen gold, which was hijacked by the traitor among them after an earlier heist. In the opening sequence, set in Venice, the gang, led by John Bridger (Donald Sutherland), a suave criminal mastermind in the twilight of his career, makes off with a safe containing $35 million in gold ingots, fleeing the scene of the crime in a fantastic, swooping boat chase through the canals of Venice.
But no sooner has the gang reconvened for a self-congratulatory Champagne toast atop a mountain peak than it is betrayed by one of its own. The traitor, Steve Frezelli (Edward Norton), kills Bridger and leaves Bridger's protégé, Charlie Croker (Mark Wahlberg), presumably drowned in icy water raked with machine-gun fire.
But Charlie survives and joins with John's vengeful daughter, Stella (Charlize Theron), a professional vault technician and expert safecracker, to recover the gold. The thief is discovered living in a posh Los Angeles compound patrolled by armed guards and attack dogs.
The new team put together by Charlie is the demographically diverse assortment of experts that is de rigueur nowadays in action films. Lyle (Seth Green), a brainy computer nerd still smarting from his college roommate's theft of his idea for Napster, knows how to turn snapshots into meticulously accurate blueprints. His crowning talent is an ability to hack into the computers at the Los Angeles traffic control center and reprogram the signals to facilitate a smooth getaway.
Handsome Rob (Jason Statham), an English race-car whiz and world-class womanizer, is the driver of the getaway car and the movie's grinning testosterone shot, and Left-Ear (Mos Def) its wisecracking demolitions expert.
Although the remake, which opens today nationwide, tentatively follows the plot outline of the original, in spirit and mood it is a much chillier film, cued by John Powell's elaborate percussive score. The problem with that chill is that it doesn't allow much personality to leak through the facade.
Charlie is Mr. Wahlberg's latest attempt to present himself as a contemporary James Cagney-like hybrid of action hero and leading man, and once again this pug-faced actor falls short. The blank, opaque quality that served him in ''Boogie Nights'' and can make him a sinister villain works against him here. He simply lacks the charisma of a credible ringleader and displays little passion, even when riled.
Although Mr. Norton's Steve is similarly affectless, his calculated vacancy is the sneaky, poker-faced void of a pathological liar. With his shifty, deep-set eyes that don't quite focus, and features that never settle into a readable expression beyond cunningly faked naïveté, he projects an ominous disengagement behind which you sense a heart of ice. This actor's skill at suggesting a coiled psychopath in hiding is what made his breakthrough performance in ''Primal Fear'' so memorably creepy, and it contributed to the disturbing ambiguity of his turns in ''American History X,'' ''Fight Club'' and ''25th Hour.''
As Stella, Ms. Theron comfortably inhabits the stock role of the unflappable babe who exploits her sex appeal to the team's advantage while matching her male colleagues in grace under pressure.
The mechanical star of a movie that admires its characters' machinelike coordination is the minicar, a hardy little bug that in the movie's climactic car-and-helicopter chase squeezes through spaces no ordinary vehicle could hope to navigate. Might ''The Italian Job'' be signaling a shift in automotive fashion from large to small?
''The Italian Job'' 
~
Jim Carrey embodies the scary possibility that at heart every human being is a sugar-crazed 6-year-old hellion gleefully wreaking havoc in Mommy and Daddy's fastidiously decorated living room. All this star has to do is stand there and grin to convince you that once the layers of civilization have been peeled away, what's left is an insatiable, rampaging id. And in Mr. Carrey's rambunctiously funny new comedy, ''Bruce Almighty,'' his alter ego, Bruce Nolan, a frustrated television newscaster in Buffalo relegated to human interest stories, gets to rampage at the loftiest spiritual level.
At Bruce's darkest moment, God (Morgan Freeman) comes to the rescue and summons Bruce by cellphone to the deserted industrial building where God works as a janitor. With an avuncular smirk, he invites Bruce, who has been loudly cursing the heavens, to try his hand at running the universe while God takes a break. Maybe, he chortles, Bruce can do a better job.
The notion of omnipotence prompts Mr. Carrey to go to new adrenaline-crazed comic extremes. As a surrogate deity who impulsively lassos the moon to bring it closer to the earth for a night of romance, he behaves like a hyperkinetic action toy, swiveling and lurching madly from one silly whim to the next. Even more than Jerry Lewis, Robin Williams or Pee-wee Herman, Mr. Carrey, now 41 (pretty old for an overgrown kid), sustains a maniacal energy that explodes off the screen in blinding electrical zaps.
Those jolts don't always feel pleasant. Mr. Carrey's beaming glare and carnivorous smile convey an undercurrent of bullying insistence that threatens to turn nasty at any moment. (You'd better get with his program, he implies, or else.) And once Bruce is divinely empowered, revenge is high on his list of priorities.
In one of the funniest gags he conjures a monkey that emerges head first from the posterior of a thug who beat him up a couple of days earlier. In another prank he humiliates the rival who beat him out for the job of news anchor by making him babble tongue-twisting nonsense over the air.
The notion of Mr. Carrey as God has theological implications that the filmmakers may not have fully considered. Mr. Carrey's infantile Almighty is selfish, capricious and shortsighted, and he delights in cruel practical jokes. It may sound like a sweet idea to lasso the moon and bring it a little closer to your window, but the movie is smart enough to acknowledge that the meteorological implications of such tampering could be catastrophic. At least until its preachy, goody-goody conclusion, ''Bruce Almighty,'' which opens today nationwide, is funnier than either of the two earlier Carrey films (''Ace Ventura: Pet Detective'' and ''Liar, Liar'') directed by Tom Shadyac, who oversaw this latest farce.
It all begins at a promotional event celebrating Buffalo's Biggest Cookie. Sick and tired of being the station's goofy novelty act, Bruce pursues the about-to-be-vacated job of news anchor. The moment he learns he didn't get the position, he is on the air at Niagara Falls, has a public meltdown and is fired. Prowling the city in a funk, Bruce hurls angry accusations at the heavens that are countered when he is summoned for an interview for the job of divine stand-in.
After affectionately toying with Bruce, God does a couple of casual miracles to prove he's who he says he is, then makes Bruce the offer he can't refuse. Bruce immediately discovers he can walk on water and has the power to send his girlfriend, Grace (Jennifer Aniston), to reeling new peaks of sexual ecstasy. Resuming his television career, he sets his sights on the elusive anchor position and turns himself into a local news star by creating spectacular scoops wherever he happens to be.
But being God, Bruce discovers, can also be a drag. When he begins to hear the muttered prayers of the world, he has no idea how to silence the din. In desperation, he lumps those millions of pleas into e-mail and answers them with a blanket yes. As a result, a lottery has so many winners that the city erupts in riot when it's revealed that each lucky contestant will pocket a measly $17. Meanwhile Bruce's love life suffers after an initial rush. As Grace, the loyal girlfriend who runs a day-care center, Ms. Aniston brings a likable common-sense realism to a largely thankless role.
For Mr. Freeman, playing God is a piece of cake. With his quiet, measured drawl, which implies depths of good-humored wisdom, he may be the most convincing screen sage Hollywood has these days. The movie's fuzzy idea of God as a sly old Santa Claus who means well but can't begin to answer all the prayers directed his way is a soothing pop confection intended to ruffle as few feathers as possible.
Most people would be better off, he insists, if they figured things out for themselves instead of relying on him so much. The movie, whose portrayal of divine intervention parodies ''It's a Wonderful Life'' (from which it quotes), manages the clever trick of not sounding dogmatic while playing cannily into a cultural climate in which the will of God is invoked with increasing frequency and fervor.
The story of a zany television personality who pines to be a serious news anchor also mirrors the predicament of Mr. Carrey, who tried in two of his last four movies (''The Majestic'' and ''Man on the Moon,'' both commercial disappointments) to break out of his comic stereotype. It's a problem he shares with other screen symbols who yearn to flex their acting muscles. As many detours as Julia Roberts may take from playing populist princesses and Mr. Carrey may take from hyperactive brats, they remain imprisoned in their archetypes. Who said being a latter-day Olympian is easy?
''Bruce Almighty'' 
~
Originality is not usually something you expect from a remake. But in a field that includes such pointless recent updates of not-quite-classic older movies as ''Bedazzled,'' ''Sweet November'' and ''The Truth About Charlie,'' ''The In-Laws'' stands out. Not for its freshness or novelty, mind you, but for its utter, nearly systematic lack of imagination. It's as if the director, Andrew Fleming, and the screenwriters, Nat Mauldin and Ed Solomon, set out to make a movie that would be mediocre in every respect. If so, they have completely succeeded.
Even the music is lifted from other, better movies. A noisy chase sequence early on is accompanied by Paul McCartney singing ''Live and Let Die.'' Later a wedding-day washout unspools over ''Raindrops Keep Fallin' on My Head,'' by which time your eyes may indeed be turning red, with boredom and irritation.
These selections are too feeble and obvious to qualify as neat pop-culture allusions, any more than the appearance of KC and the Sunshine Band constitutes a knowing wink at 70's disco. The intention seems to be to comfort audiences by giving them nothing they haven't seen before or nothing they would object to dozing in front of after the meal on a transcontinental flight.
This goes for the jokes as well, which turn on such moldy comic aperçus as the weirdness of Asian cuisine (a whole stuffed python is served at a Vietnamese restaurant) and the existence of homosexuality, especially in prison. Since this is a wedding movie, there is also the obligatory drunken, sexually indiscreet bridesmaid and the crackpot spiritualist ex-wife (Candice Bergen), who shows up at the big event with a Buddhist monk in tow.
Ms. Bergen plays a New Age variation on the brittle upper-crustiness that has been her stock in trade of late. Her role though is very much an afterthought. The prospective newlyweds, Melissa and Marc (Lindsay Sloane and Ryan Reynolds), are as cute as a pair of puppies, but they are similarly marginal to the picture's main concern, which is the oil-and-water odd couple formed by their dads, a neurotic podiatrist and an erratic C.I.A. operative.
These roles, originated by Alan Arkin and Peter Falk in Arthur Hiller's 1979 movie of the same name, are played here by Albert Brooks and Michael Douglas. Mr. Brooks is Jerry Peyser, the podiatrist, for whom obsessive worry is less a personality trait than a worldview. His first meeting with Steve Tobias (Mr. Douglas) goes badly awry over that stuffed snake, and various international-espionage types converge on the two dads in the men's room. Before long Steve has dragged Jerry to France (via Barbra Streisand's private jet, though without Ms. Streisand), where they meet a mincing arms dealer whose foot fetish blossoms into a wild crush on Jerry.
Some amusing bits are stuffed into the hectic plot, which involves the coincidence of petty domestic crises with the potential sale of a stray Russian nuclear submarine (bound ultimately for Lake Michigan). Most of them arrive courtesy of Mr. Brooks, who appears at one point wearing a red thong bathing suit. Apart from that, his slow sputtering takes and his incomparable ability to slide from stricken anxiety to full-blown panic are reliably enjoyable, and he at least tries to make a character out of the bundle of tics and one-liners the script has given him.
The same cannot be said of Mr. Douglas, whose lack of conviction is, in the end, more suitable to the drab, dutiful spirit of the movie, which opens today nationwide. He never gives more than what is minimally required to any scene, whether it calls for macho bluster or choked-up parental contrition. The original was no masterpiece, but at least Mr. Falk, with his loopy, scruffy intensity, gave the character (then named Vincent Ricardo) a hint of soulfulness and made the improbability of such a guy being entrusted with government secrets part of the joke.
Mr. Hiller's ''In-Laws'' was silly, but in an idiosyncratic way that makes it worth catching when it shows up on cable. That is the new version's destination, too, of course, and it will lose nothing in the transition to the small screen, since it is shot with all the action safely in the center of the frame, and designed to be forgotten in plenty of time for the next remake.
''The In-Laws'' 
~
Directed by Kunihiro Yuyama and Jim Malone
G, 80 minutes
''Pokémon Heroes,'' No. 5 in the series of animated feature films based on the diminishingly popular Japanese children's television show and line of video games, plays more like a catalog than a movie. The film dutifully trots out several new additions to the Pokémon product line: cute little ''pocket monsters'' that kids are encouraged to ''capture'' (i.e., buy). But otherwise, the film, which opens nationwide today, is a tedious, unimaginative affair.
The central human figure in the series is Ash Ketchum, a boy who roams the world unburdened by parental supervision as he searches for more Pokémon to train and add to his collection. (There are now more than 250 characters in the Pokémon universe.) He is aided by his first and finest Pokémon acquisition, Pikachu, a little yellow rabbitlike creature who emits devastating bolts of electricity when provoked.
Pikachu is provoked several times in the imponderable course of ''Pokémon Heroes,'' which is as densely plotted as a Tolkien novel but has no real depth or resonance. Ash and Pikachu have been invited to the exotic city of Altomare -- a computer-generated blend of Venice and Versailles -- to participate in a sort of Pokémon Olympics. They soon find themselves caught up in a cosmic battle between Altomare's two oversize Pokémon protectors, birdlike creatures named Latios and Latias, who will certainly be available soon at a toy store near you, and a couple of fashion-conscious intergalactic thieves, Annie and Oakley, who look like Powerpuff Girls gone wrong.
The retro-Euro design of Altomare, as well as several passages in the musical score, seems meant to evoke the world of Japan's greatest animator, Hayao Miyazaki (''Spirited Away''). But ''Pokémon Heroes'' is flat, charmless and crudely executed, with the exception of some respectable 3-D effects used to present the narrow streets and canals of the city. Inviting a comparison to Mr. Miyazaki in this context is not a sign of good judgment.   DAVE KEHR

~
''I wish I knew what I was supposed to do,'' Neo (Keanu Reeves) says early in ''The Matrix Reloaded'' after a violent, apparently premonitory dream. Of course he does know what to do: he's ''the One,'' as murmured in the mellifluous, currant-scented voice of his mentor, Morpheus (the righteous Laurence Fishburne).
Neo is wondering about his place as cynosure of the new world, trapped under the burden of knowing he's expected to lead the way. And the weight of a similar worry rests on the shoulders of ''Reloaded.'' Relax, the staging of the action sequences is as viciously elegant as you've been primed to expect, though there is a dispiriting more-of-the-same aspect to the picture.
It has been four years since the release of ''The Matrix,'' the first part of the planned action-metaphorical melodrama trilogy. This second installment, which opens nationwide tomorrow, is a blend of Hong Kong action, comic books, anime, philosophy and the New Testament and has the feel of a holding pattern.
But the mastery of filmmaking hasn't abated in ''Reloaded.'' The writing and directing tandem of Larry and Andy Wachowski are as suited to the task of guiding this film as Neo is to saving the world from the onslaught of the Sentinels, computer emissaries bent on eliminating all vestiges of humanity. Their relentless love of movies, junk-food mythology and thoughtful reimagining of a future endangered by mass consumption and proliferation of pleasure to the point of soullessness makes for a heady and unusual mix.
The directors pay their audiences the unlikely compliment of taking them seriously. Unfortunately they take themselves too seriously. What the first ''Matrix'' had going for it was surprise, a freshness that would be impossible to match. The hot-blooded tumble of energy and concepts wrestling for primacy was viscerally and intellectually arousing; everybody had something to take home.
''Reloaded'' seeks to increase the emotional stakes -- which it doesn't quite accomplish -- while leaving enough of a cliffhanger that audiences will be bedeviled enough to flock back into the tents for the last portion. Hilariously, the directors make their points about the corrupting power of images in an idealized context of movie action heroes so beautifully that designers are aping the sleek, tailored frock coats and dusters that the heroes don to combat evil in what is essentially a dream world. In the human world they live in disintegrating attire that wouldn't look out of place on Phish roadies. The dream merchants are missing the philosophical point of the picture, which takes on added significance with some of the cameos.
Neo and his lover, Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) are so fit that they seem like virtual humans; they're burned down to true grit; there even seems to be distended vascularity flexing in their sculptured eyebrows. They need to be in shape, since they battle new foes including platinum-dreadlocked apparitions (played by Neil and Adrian Rayment).
In ''The Matrix'' Neo was awakened to his abilities and destiny to combat the forces of virtual oppression. ''Reloaded'' takes us deep into Zion, the heart of the human world that Neo, Morpheus, Trinity and a new team member, Link (Harold Perrineau), have been fighting to protect from the computers that are trying to wipe out homo sapiens.
They're worn, returning heroes, though many in Zion -- including Morpheus's rival, Commander Lock (Harry Lennix) -- are skeptical of their ideals. Morpheus's belief that victory is at hand, which leads to a worldwide celebration that looks like a rave taking place on Planet Groove, doesn't sit well with the pragmatic Lock at all; he has no faith in Neo or Morpheus.
Lock's envy is amplified by Morpheus's past romantic ties to the all-business warrior-girl Niobe (Jada Pinkett Smith), who seems to have emerged from the Mary J. Blige school of directness: she telegraphs what she's thinking before she opens her mouth. Outside Zion, 250,000 Sentinels stand by. In addition to that threat Agent Smith, who seemed to have been destroyed in the first film, is now a free-floating renegade who can multiply at will, a copy without an original. He's again played by the capable Hugo Weaving, who brings an exultant beatitude to laminated malignancy.
A rueful hero, sodden by the demands of his role, is the subtext of ''Reloaded.'' Neo is beset by eager devotees, and Mr. Reeves's mildly shell-shocked blankness -- he's haunted by aspirations -- is the complement to the adoring throngs, who don't bother to notice his discomfort.
The Wachowskis want to heighten the narrative and philosophical import hinted at in the first film, assuming, probably rightly, that audiences want more to digest than digitally abetted mano a mano climaxes. ''Reloaded'' sounds like the right word: half the picture seems to be about uploading the explication of mythology, which takes on a doleful self-importance. These repercussions are intoned in stentorian, buttercream tones by Morpheus; no wonder Neo is so depressed.
''Reloaded'' is also an apt word because much of the tenor of the action is repeated. The martial arts sequences are breathtakingly staged; the 15-minute chase sequence on an multilane highway is alone worth sitting through the picture.
More than its predecessor, ''Reloaded'' is about the virtues of the industrial world versus the dangers of new technology: old-fashioned phones with rotary dials still figure in this world. And an important component in helping to fight the Sentinels, the Keymaker (Randall Duk Kim), actually carries around old-fashioned master keys and works his magic on grimy, metal tumblers instead of virtual pathways.
The Wachowskis' use of space rivals that of musical directors like Gene Kelly and Mark Sandrich. The battles seem a bit repetitive, though, it's as if no one is sure to what to do with Neo's powers. More important, ''Reloaded'' has one of the most excitingly subversive and radical points of view ever seen in a major motion picture: a postmodern purview that accords equal weight to philosophical ideals from people of color. One example is the warmhearted spotlight on Gloria Foster, who returns as the grande dame Oracle, the source of all knowledge for Neo. And few actresses have ever been as luminously photographed as Ms. Pinkett Smith. Even Mr. Reeves's pan-Asian exoticism lends itself to this ideal of the future.
''Matrix'' Reloaded'' 
~
The most astonishing thing about ''Daddy Day Care,'' a comedy that would have to work harder even to justify the appellation uninspired, is that a kick in the groin is now a joke for toddlers. They are both the target audience and the co-stars of this Eddie Murphy vehicle -- more of a Big Wheel, really.
In the movie, intended for those who take their apple juice in sipping cups, Mr. Murphy plays an out-of-work marketing executive with no real interest in children except for his son. He decides to open a day care center with Phil (Jeff Garlin), his pal and equally fired colleague, who's a little afraid of his own son. You can't get more high-concept, or less plotted, than this, and ''Daddy Day Care'' is proof. It's a series of trailers for Nickelodeon, which mostly feature Mr. Garlin being attacked by something angry, either kids or bees, and probably in the sequel, kids of bees.
The extremely flimsy connective tissue is Mr. Murphy, who barely bothers to do takes; he'll raise an eyebrow here and there, but he mostly uses a voice so smooth and warm you could pour it over pancakes. And in this context the very young audience is so primed to react to him as Eddie Murphy that it's surprising that the children in the cast don't call him Eddie. He can get away with this because he knows the movie will do most of the work for him; he's Beverly Hills Pop.
His wife (Regina King) smiles and shakes her head when he says he'll use their home as a day care headquarters. Maybe her secret is that she wants to redecorate, since any mom knows that a pack of minimally supervised 4-year-olds will turn her furnishings into kindling.
There is so much more to be done with this idea that the film could stand to be remade. ''Daddy Day Care,'' which opens today nationwide, is nearly a remake of ''Mr. Mom,'' although at least here the star isn't frightened of his kids. Instead it's another cliché: before losing his job, Charlie (Mr. Murphy) is so strung out on its demands that he doesn't make time for his shy, quiet little boy, Ben, who clearly adores him.
What's also revelatory about Mr. Murphy is how relaxed he is with children; Charlie's relationship with his son has a natural ease. (Five years ago, just before the release of ''Dr. Doolittle,'' who'd have thought Mr. Murphy would become someone he had once made fun of? -- Bill Cosby.)
And little Ben (Khamani Griffin) is a cutie pie with suffering dimples, enormous dark eyes and lashes so long and minklike that Jennifer Lopez would skin him alive for them. The director, Steve Carr, uses Mr. Griffin as nap time for the movie, quieting the hysteria the other wild kids bring whenever they show up.
Anjelica Huston is the competition, the proprietor of the Chapman Academy, a rigid, snooty child care institution and boarding school. Her name is Miss Harridan, since Miss Broom Hilda was apparently unavailable for legal reasons, and Phil refers to her place as ''the Marine Corps of day care.'' Mr. Garlin's wry, slow delivery puts a bit of extra English in the picture's few good lines, as does his demeanor. He's too big a guy to work himself into frenzied exasperation; frustration comes to him on his own schedule.
And when Steve Zahn shows up as an old work buddy who pops in to help out, ''Daddy Day Care'' is almost on the verge of generating chemistry among the very able comic talents of these three men. The air crackles around them, though the expectation dissipates very quickly.
Since that convergence doesn't happen, anyone over 20 -- including those working at the theater -- will be left to reflect on tangential things: for example, that Lacey Chabert, Mississippi girl and runt of the ''Family of Five'' litter, has grown up into a good little actress. She manages to play Miss Harridan's assistant without bursting into giggles when she calls her boss by name. Or that Laura Kightlinger, as Phil's wife, shows an almost mystical patience, given that she has even less to do than Ms. King or Ms. Chabert.
Most intriguing -- well, when speaking about ''Daddy Day Care,'' anyway -- is that the Ramones' song ''I Wanna Be Sedated'' and ''The Message'' by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five can now be used in children's movies. As Mr. Murphy slogs through the film, a line from ''The Message'' may be bouncing around in his brain: ''You got to have a con in this land of milk and honey.''
''Daddy Day Care'' 
~
Rock Hudson and Doris Day starred in only three movies together, but their names are forever conjoined in the cultural memory, signifying the guilty pleasures of a supposedly more innocent era. The comedies they made for Universal from the late 1950's to the mid-60's -- with each other and with surrogates ranging from Cary Grant to Gina Lollobrigida -- were the product of a moment when the incipient sexual revolution collided with the moribund Hollywood Production Code in an explosion of bright color, lush music and naughty innuendo.
These entertainments (''Pillow Talk,'' ''Lover Come Back'' and ''Send Me No Flowers'') were at once dopey and ingenious, wholesome and sophisticated, teasing their audiences, as the romantic principals teased each other, by pretending to be what they were not: subversive when they were in fact conventional, and vice versa.
''Down With Love,'' Peyton Reed's buoyant homage to the Hudson-Day pictures, which opens in Manhattan today and nationwide next Friday, wears its affection for that bygone era on its sleeve. And also on its collars, ties, hats, cuff links, dressing gowns, slim tuxedos and curvy sheaths. Every inch of every Cinemascope frame -- from the zippy title credits to the geographically absurd Manhattan sets to the modular furniture to the glass martini pitchers -- is designed to plunge you into a fairy-tale 1962. Marc Shaiman's score deftly blends finger-popping lounge jazz with velvety orchestral swoons, while Jeff Cronenweth's cinematography approximates the bold, viscous tones of old-fashioned Technicolor.
The Hudson-Day roles are taken up by Ewan McGregor and Renée Zellweger, unflappable veterans of the recent campaign to revive the movie musical. They demonstrate together, as they did (separately) in ''Moulin Rouge'' and ''Chicago,'' a thoroughly charming immunity to embarrassment. They also remind you that the real Rock Hudson and Doris Day flourished in the days before personal trainers, Diet Coke and the Atkins Diet turned Hollywood into the land of ropy biceps and flat tummies. Mr. McGregor's wiry, wolfish energy is more like the young Sinatra than the bulky, slow-moving Hudson, but never mind. His high-flying playboy, a magazine writer named Catcher Block, is a lithe Lothario, a woman's man, a man's man, a man about town.
And if Ms. Zellweger puckers where Ms. Day might have grimaced, she manages, as Ms. Day did, to swivel engagingly between goofiness and sex appeal, and to look her grown-up age even when she is called upon to be utterly childish.
Like Civil War enthusiasts in a Virginia cow pasture, Ms. Zellweger and Mr. McGregor don period costumes to re-enact a legendary skirmish in the battle of the sexes. Their fidelity to the past is impressive, but it is hard to see the point of the exercise, or to feel that much is at stake.
Ms. Zellweger is Barbara Novak, who arrives in Manhattan from Maine to oversee the publication of her book, ''Down With Love,'' an antiromantic manifesto that argues for the equality of the sexes in matters sexual and professional. Her smart, neurotic, chain-smoking editor, Vicki Hiller (Sarah Paulson), wants Barbara to be profiled by Catcher, a prize-winning gadabout journalist for a men's magazine called Know.
After a deliciously contrived setup, Catcher decides to write an exposé, which he will clinch by making Barbara, who is dogmatically committed to casual sex, fall in love with him. This he does through the elaborately offhand ruse of pretending to be an astronaut, which involves putting on glasses, covering his Scot's burr in a mock-Texas twang and swapping his gadget-filled bachelor pad for the fussy digs of Peter McMannus (David Hyde Pierce), his editor and foil.
Mr. Pierce, ever the paragon of uptight prissiness, is playing what was, 40 years ago, the Tony Randall role, and it is delightful to see Mr. Randall himself saunter through a scene or two, bestowing his sly, patriarchal blessing. ''Down With Love'' works hard to earn it and is, for the most part, intelligent and amusing, even if it never achieves the full-tilt zany desperation of Delbert Mann's ''Lover Come Back,'' the best of the real Hudson-Day movies.
Eve Ahlert and Dennis Drake, the screenwriters, have shaken together a canny cocktail of period vernacular and deliberately labored double entendres, some of which extend for entire scenes. The best moments have a glorious, hectic artificiality, emphasized by split screens, gimmicky editing and the obviously cardboard three-quarter moon that bobs in the ersatz Manhattan sky.
As always, the final destination on this jaunt is matrimony, and the filmmakers, so meticulous in their imitation of the dress and décor of the Kennedy era, are unabashed revisionists in matters of sexual politics. Their tribute is also an updating and a critique, informed by the commonsensical feminism that Barbara Novak's best seller parodies and also by an impatience with the hypocrisy that was the source of all the fun to begin with. This movie can, without blushing, make jokes that acknowledge the existence of premarital and nonheterosexual sex, things that its ancestors could address only in code.
The obsolescence of that code -- and of the Code itself -- has the effect of flattening out the movie's humor and making its strenuous cleverness feel, in the end, more dutiful than daring. The most obvious recent point of comparison is Todd Haynes's ''Far From Heaven,'' which was devoted to reanimating the Technicolor melodramas of Douglas Sirk, several starring Hudson. (''Down With Love'' and ''Far From Heaven'' might best be described as offerings to the memory of Ross Hunter, who produced both ''Pillow Talk'' and Sirk's ''Imitation of Life'' in the same year.)
Mr. Haynes plunged into the subtext of the old movies, exploring their deep springs of anxiety about race, marriage and sexual identity. Some of these were present in the comedies as well: their hectic ridiculousness reflected a world in which the rules of conduct, in the bedroom, the workplace and everywhere else, were being rapidly rewritten.
But Mr. Reed snips that subtext away, and his movie takes the mandate of inoffensiveness much more seriously than its winking, tongue-in-cheek predecessors ever did. As it tweaks the attitudes and behaviors of the past, ''Down With Love'' is careful to uphold the right-thinking norms of the present, denying the audience the pleasures of subversion and satire and managing, in spite of its knowing good cheer, to be less sophisticated than what it imitates.
In spite of all the manic high jinks, the laughter here arises not from confusion and hysteria, but from complacency, which is not as funny.
''Down With Love'' 
~
Adam and Evelyn -- please note the symbolism of the names -- are graduate students who attend an Edenic Southern California college called Mercy. The institution's name is one of the many little jokes strewn like creative-writing-class rimshots through ''The Shape of Things,'' Neil LaBute's adaptation of his own play. Mercy may be the quality in shortest supply in Mr. LaBute's chilly, claustrophobic universe. His characters show as little toward one another as he does toward them -- or us.
In this curdled parable of sexual cruelty -- a kind of gender-reversed variation of ''In the Company of Men,'' Mr. LaBute's first film -- Evelyn, played by Rachel Weisz, is not only the Original Woman but the serpent and, in her own estimation, the creator. She is an artist, displaying the passionate snottiness that is often, in movies and plays, the defining trait of such people.
Her big thesis project, which she teasingly keeps secret through most of the film, provides a climactic shock, which is provocative without being especially thought-provoking. It is foreshadowed by some blazingly obvious literary references (to ''Hedda Gabler'' and ''Pygmalion'') tucked into the dialogue and the set design in attempts at subtlety that make them all the more ostentatious. At the end, Adam (Paul Rudd) shares the frame with the word MORAL, rendered in big red capital letters on the wall behind him.
But before we arrive at the moral, over the course of a very long hour and a half, we witness Evelyn and Adam traipsing and jawboning through some four-way romantic complications that also involve Philip (Frederick Weller), Adam's obnoxious best friend, and Philip's sweet, nervous fiancée, Jenny (Gretchen Mol), who once had a crush on Adam. Adam, however, was too shy and insecure to respond to her cues. At first, he is pudgy and timid, skittering around campus in a ratty brown corduroy jacket and responding to Evelyn's interest in him with something close to terror.
Once he and Evelyn have turned into a couple, though, he begins to change: dressing better, speaking less hesitantly, dropping the weight and generally morphing into the Paul Rudd who so perfectly embodied the thinking teenager's college-boy heartthrob in ''Clueless.''
Ms. Weisz, for her part, is as bewitching as ever, and also genuinely frightening, and Ms. Mol has a melting vulnerability that gives her thinly written character a ripe, melodramatic coloring. Unfortunately, these actors are subject to Mr. LaBute's usual dramatic method, which is to cobble together a preposterous moral outrage and then wave it in front of our faces, asking us to believe that it is a window, or even a mirror.
They are also forced to speak his labored distillation of the contemporary American vernacular, an idiom whose rhythms may work better on stage. On screen, especially when accompanied by clumsy, literal-minded camera work, the words flail in the uncomfortable limbo between the way people actually talk and the way ambitious, overpraised writers like to pretend they do.
And there are certainly people out there willing to accept the pretense, who persist in mistaking Mr. LaBute's easy contempt for brave sophistication and his intellectual posturing for insight. After trying, in ''Nurse Betty'' and ''Possession'' (both written by other people), to show a softer, more humane side (and succeeding, instead, in demonstrating his limitations as a filmmaker), Mr. LaBute has returned to his more familiar role as an anatomist of human awfulness.
But aside from the faces of the actors, there is very little in ''The Shape of Things'' that is recognizably human. Elvis Costello, whose songs provide occasional bumpers between the talky, shapeless scenes, has managed more corrosive insight in a single verse than Mr. LaBute has in entire plays, and more compassion as well.
''The Shape of Things,'' which opens today nationwide, pretends to raise questions about the responsibilities of artists and the corrupting effect of erotic power, but instead erects a straw man (or, more accurately, a straw woman) whose actions are so extreme that the only appropriate response is the sputtering obscenities to which the other, slightly less contemptible characters are reduced.
But the straw woman, as it happens, has already delivered an appropriate verdict on the movie, right at the beginning. ''I don't like art that isn't true,'' Evelyn tells Adam as she prepares to deface a sculpture in the college museum. Neither do I. But Mr. LaBute goes one better, with his glib, moralizing hatred of art of any kind -- and also of the range of human desires, imperfections, fears and failures that motivate it.
''The Shape of Things'' 
~
If you have never heard of Lizzie McGuire, you are almost certainly not a female resident of the United States between the ages of 8 and 14, and you are unlikely to be related to one. The protagonist of her own self-titled series on the Disney Channel, Lizzie, as played by the appealing Hilary Duff, is a brown-eyed, blond-haired early teenager on the brink of what will certainly be dazzling womanhood. But for the moment, she leads a life fraught with anxiety, self-consciousness and a complete lack of confidence in her ability to attract an age-appropriate member of the opposite sex.
Created by Terri Minsky, the cable series is a psychologically sophisticated if not always realistically resolved exploration of adolescent angst that often manages to be funny in a way that Woody Allen might be if he were a teenage girl. Lizzie has her own Jiminy Cricket on her shoulder, in the person of an animated, highly sarcastic version of herself, who expresses her darkest self-doubts in trenchantly sarcastic terms.
The series deals coolly and responsibly with issues of physical and emotional development that, in the dark, distant past, were probably reserved for hushed conversations between mothers and daughters. But in Lizzie's world -- as, for that matter, in the world of all the ''tweener'' films this critic has come across -- mothers, fathers and any other available adults are themselves far too childlike and clueless (Lizzie's father's hobby is painting garden elves) to solve their own problems, much less offer words of wisdom to their apprehensive offspring.
''The Lizzie McGuire Movie,'' which opens nationally today, is an entertaining and effective expansion of the television series to roughly the dimensions of a feature film. Using a teenage dream scenario that dates back at least to ''Three Coins in the Fountain'' (1954) and ''Rome Adventure'' (1962), the director Jim Fall (''Trick'') and his three writers follow Lizzie and her classmates on a summer trip to Rome, where romance and adventure quite naturally follow.
On her first day in Rome, Lizzie tosses her coin (now a one-Euro piece) into the Trevi Fountain, and is rewarded by the vision of Paolo (Yani Gellman), a 17-year-old Europop star who flirts with her and asks her to ditch the class trip and meet him the next day. Paolo has just lost his longtime singing partner, a dark-haired beauty named Isabella (also played by Ms. Duff), and needs a look-alike to replace her on the stage of a coming music awards show. Who better than Lizzie, who, apart from the hair, the manner and the American sports clothes, is a dead ringer for the missing Italian diva?
Rehearsal time is interspersed with romance as Lizzie and her best friend, Gordo (Adam Lamberg), come up with imaginative ways to avoid the trip's draconian chaperone (Alex Borstein, in the film's funniest performance) and allow Lizzie to slip away for private tours of Rome's most famous tourist attractions. Affection grows between the young girl and the pop star, but so does Gordo's envy; apparently, beneath his guise as best friend, he also pines for the lovely Lizzie.
With Robert Carradine and Hallie Todd turning up as Lizzie's hapless parents, and Jake Thomas as her scheming younger brother, the picture unfolds as a light romantic comedy that adults will probably find familiar but tolerable, while their age-appropriate offspring will be transported to new heights of cinematic enchantment. For all the antiseptic, sitcom qualities of ''The Lizzie McGuire Movie,'' it does touch on some significant moral and behavioral issues, just like the Disney serials most parents will remember (''Spin and Marty,'' etc.), though tempered by the 21st-century notion that shopping is the best solution to any kind of psychological stress.
''The Lizzie McGuire Movie'' has been rated PG (Parental guidance suggested); it has some chaste kissing.
THE LIZZIE McGUIRE MOVIE
Directed by Jim Fall; written by Susan Estelle Jansen, Ed Decter and John J. Strauss; director of photography, Jerzy Zielinski; edited by Margie Goodspeed; music by Cliff Eidelman; production designer, Douglas Higgins; produced by Stan Rogow; released by Walt Disney Pictures. Running time: 90 minutes. This film 
~
''The Dancer Upstairs,'' John Malkovich's directorial debut, is a stoic tease of a movie. But it is a worthy effort because Mr. Malkovich proves his devotion to actors, lingering on them during moments of silence. The director also uses Costa-Gavras's ''State of Siege'' as both homage and reference point.
''Dancer'' echoes its director's own deportment as a performer, alternating silky smoothness with burlap coarseness. Though Mr. Malkovich stays entirely behind the scenes, he creates a languorous but gripping story of people fighting to stay a step ahead of hopelessness. And his trademark confidence is displayed by his insistence on a slowed rhythm to demand audience attention.
Adapted for the screen by Nicholas Shakespeare, from his own novel, the film is based on the hunt for Abimael Guzmán, the charismatic leader of the Shining Path terrorist group in Peru. The picture has a poker-faced mien, shying away from outbursts of explosive emotion to alleviate tension. Instead the director and the screenwriter have chosen to make the present feel like a holding pattern between the past and the future. This is illustrated in a spare prologue in the unnamed Latin American country that sets ''Dancer'' in motion.
For the lawyer-turned-police-officer Agustin Rejas (Javier Bardem), the future means tracking down a pack of guerrillas, led by a man known as Ezequiel (Abel Folk). In the prologue, set five years earlier, we see Rejas in a violent brush with Ezequiel, a moment that has obviously stayed with him. Determined, solicitous and calm, Rejas goes about his job, sifting through the wreckage -- physical and emotional -- left in Ezequiel's wake.
Mr. Bardem portrays Rejas with a morose wit, a cheekiness that registers almost as an afterthought. It's because he's a man burdened with regret: regret for not having acted years ago, since the subsequent horrors have accumulated like interest on a bad loan. Like the vaguely floating present of ''Dancer,'' Rejas is trapped in the middle. His superiors are pressuring him to bring down Ezequiel before the nation's teetering status quo collapses. Rejas is also mired in a shaky marriage; his wife's raving about ''The Bridges of Madison County,'' the subject of her book group, alone explains his misery. (Mr. Shakespeare gleefully takes a potshot at middle-brow rapture.)
''Dancer,'' which opens today in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and Toronto, is not a series of clichés about Latin America. Rejas is neither a robust caricature nor a passive man who finally reaches his breaking point. What seems like passivity is Rejas's resolute detachment. He keeps the world at arm's length, regarding it with a weary professionalism because his manner is the only tool that keeps him from being subsumed by depression.
Mr. Bardem's performance is different from anything he's done before: the vivacious, dying gay Cuban poet Reinaldo Arenas of ''Before Night Falls,'' or the brooding paraplegic of ''Live Flesh,'' characters who couldn't hide the tremors of emotion that rocked them to the very core.
Here he underplays so intelligently that when he finally releases a hint of pleasure -- watching his daughter's dance recital, he is as lost in happiness as she is in concentration -- it's shocking because we get to see how much pent-up emotion Rejas possesses. It registers most strongly during moments like a coolly tense nighttime chase, as he drives through the streets stalking a little boy who may lead him to Ezequiel.
It's here, too, that Rejas escapes the formality of speaking in English, which he uses throughout the movie, and addresses the boy in flowing, furtive Spanish. This choice -- having the Hispanic cast speak in English -- robs the picture of some urgency. But having the actors use a language that they are often uncomfortable with makes the protean absurdity seem all the more transfixing. Neither the characters' language nor their homeland, apparently, belongs to them.
For Mr. Bardem it is a compelling wrinkle that is a component of a major performance; his English seems another way of compartmentalizing his life, keeping all the other separate elements from touching. His observance of his daughter's dance recital is also a way for him to regard her lovely dance teacher, Yolanda (Laura Morante), without acting on his feelings.
The measure of propriety in their demeanors -- going through their doomed motions -- suggests the ritual distance and emotional intelligence of Graham Greene, while Ezequiel's career traces the same steps taken by Mr. Guzmán, the philosophy professor turned terrorist leader, right down to his capture.
''Dancer'' is not the hammy manifesto you'd expect from F. W. Murnau, the silent-film director that Mr. Malkovich portrayed in ''Shadow of the Vampire.'' Nor, for that matter, does the director play the tantrummy, preening brat of ''Being John Malkovich.''
Mr. Malkovich's velveteen volatility heralded the working-class brio of Chicago theater, and his magnetic, competitive spirit was enormous; in his legendary turn onstage in ''Burn This,'' he did everything but slap ''kick me'' signs on the backs of his fellow cast members. Those expecting such thorough flash in ''Dancer'' are bound to be disappointed: the ride is somber, understated and chilling.
''The Dancer Upstairs'' 
~
Early in ''Confidence,'' Dustin Hoffman, playing a grizzled, jumpy gangster known as the King, gives some rambling lowlife advice to Jake Vig, a smooth young con artist played by Edward Burns. Don't rely too much on style, the King warns, because ''style can get you killed.'' Since the King is the designated heavy, responsible for the death of one of Jake's running partners, his wisdom can be safely disregarded, and in any case we are primed to root for the suave, smirky Jake as he skips across a carefully plotted grid of doublecrosses and narrative zig-zags. But the King's lecture, delivered in his strip-club headquarters as exotic dancers audition in the background, sums up everything wrong with this slick, empty exercise in fast-talking tough-guy attitude.
''Confidence,'' directed in smooth cuts and bright colors by James Foley from a painstakingly idiomatic script by Doug Jung, is so infatuated with the idea of style at the expense of everything else that it manages not to have any of its own. ''Are we playing a con or a rendition of 'Our Town'?'' demands Jake's pal Gordo (Paul Giamatti). With some adjustment of literary references, you might pose a similar question. Instead of Thornton Wilder, the dramatist who hovers over this eager high school drama club production is David Mamet (whose ''Glengarry Glen Ross'' Mr. Foley brought to the screen). Likewise, despite an allusion to Jack Kerouac, the only novelist anyone involved with this picture seems to have read is Elmore Leonard.
Mr. Mamet and Mr. Leonard are not necessarily bad models to emulate, but the imitation here, skillful though it may be, is also so slavish and self-congratulatory that there is very little to enjoy, and less to admire. Mr. Burns, about to be rubbed out by an exceedingly patient hit man (Morris Chestnut), tells the convoluted story in flashback, offering instruction in the basic method and nomenclature of con-man-ism as if he were conducting a graduate seminar. If ''Confidence'' was made by people who have seen too many movies, it seems to be aimed at people who have seen too few. It offers up stale lessons in vocabulary and technique, all of them easily gleaned on a trip to the video store, as if they were choice bits of inside knowledge.
Along with his crew, Jake -- whose last name, at least in the movies, is also loanshark slang for excessive interest -- has lifted, perhaps by accident, some of the King's money. After some negotiation, he agrees to work off the debt by undertaking a scheme to steal an even larger sum from one of the King's rivals (Robert Forster). For this, Jake enlists Lily (Rachel Weisz), a saucy pickpocket, and takes on one of the King's minions, a thug named Lupus (Franky G). There are also a pair of bumbling Los Angeles cops (Luis Guzman and Donal Logue) and an unshaven, sleepy-looking federal agent (Andy Garcia), and by the time you work out who is conning whom you are long past caring.
The problems with ''Confidence,'' which opens today nationwide, are summed up by Mr. Burns's performance, which is difficult to distinguish from any of his other performances, except that his hair is shorter. The conviction of his own infinite charm and intelligence is apparently so strong that he need never manifest the slightest vulnerability, doubt or complicated emotion -- anything, in other words, that might be called acting. He is so glib and lazy as to make Ben Affleck look like the young Dustin Hoffman.
As for the older Mr. Hoffman, he seems to be angling for a place in the middle-aged hambone pantheon along with Christopher Walken and Al Pacino. His antic, gum-chewing turn is pure throwaway shtick, but it shows up Mr. Burns, who in their scenes together stands around flat-footed, basking in his own cocky cuteness, which he, and the movie, persist in mistaking for style.
''Confidence'' 
~
In ''Identity,'' which opens today nationwide, a group of strangers find themselves stranded at a ramshackle motel on -- how to put it? -- a dark and stormy night. Like the setting, the characters themselves have the damp, bedraggled air of cliché. There is a spoiled, has-been actress (Rebecca DeMornay), whose limo driver, a former policeman (John Cusack), has apparently driven in from a French movie, with his dark overcoat and his dog-eared copy of ''Being and Nothingness.'' These two are joined by a creepy desk clerk (John Hawkes), a call girl with a suitcase full of money (Amanda Peet), a nice-looking family (John C. McGinley is the dad), a desperate-seeming young couple (Clea DuVall and William Lee Scott), and a corrections officer (Ray Liotta) transporting a snaggle-toothed criminal (Jake Busey).
This is an awful lot to keep track of, especially since each of these folks seems to be carrying around a secret. Before long, though, they begin to die off, horribly, one by one, leaving the survivors and the audience to speculate about who the killer, and the next victim, might be. The desperate-seeming young wife has a vague recollection of seeing something similar in a movie once before, though she declines to cite the title, which is either ''And Then There Were None'' or its send-up, ''Murder by Death.''
''Identity,'' a piece of elegant directorial hackwork by James Mangold (''Girl, Interrupted,'' ''Kate and Leopold''), goes through its generic paces with enough flair and mystery to keep you moderately entertained. The apparent premise, creaky though it may be, holds ample opportunity for suspense and second-guessing, and Mr. Mangold handles the revelations and reversals of Michael Cooney's script with nerve-racking aplomb. There are horror-film conventions -- eerie sounds, slow camera movements, half-open doors and carefully arranged shadows -- that retain their effectiveness no matter how many times you've seen them before, and Mr. Mangold adds to these a grisly repertory of severed heads and bloody handprints.
The second-handness of the situation, and of the characters who inhabit it, is explained -- or justified, if you prefer -- by an enormous, gold-plated pretzel of a plot twist that I will not divulge, lest my own head end up in someone's clothes dryer. I should note, however, that the television commercial in which Mr. Cusack is shown in conversation with Alfred Molina comes very close to spoiling the surprise, which is odd since without the surprise the movie would have no reason to exist.
Whether it has much of a reason to exist with the surprise is another question. Once it is clear you are no longer watching the movie you thought you were watching, there doesn't seem to be much point in going back to the movie that you thought you were watching, which is nonetheless what happens. Still with me? When the revelation comes -- the moment that explains why all these panicky people are running around in the rain miles from anywhere -- it does administer a pleasurable jolt. You think: ''Wow. Cool.''
But the impression of cleverness, and the filmmaking dexterity that created it, fades pretty quickly, and you are left thinking: ''What? Wait a minute.'' All of those anxious, obvious characters -- and the game, earnest performances of, especially, Mr. Cusack, Ms. Peet and Mr. Hawkes -- suddenly lose dimension, and they did not have all that much to begin with.
''Identity'' is a reasonably well-executed thriller. It suffers not from awkwardness or silliness, which would make it more fun, but rather from its air-brushed, expensive pretentiousness. Like last year's ''Panic Room,'' the springtime box-office success of which Sony may be hoping to repeat, ''Identity'' is a dressed-up B picture, a hunk of cheese trying to sneak into the gourmet food aisle of the supermarket.
The cheap grubbiness that was always the hallmark of the best horror movies, and that survives in straighforwardly exploitative pictures like the recent ''Final Destination 2,'' is missing from preening high-concept movies like this one and the disastrous ''Dreamcatcher.'' Mr. Mangold acquits himself much better than Lawrence Kasdan did in that nightmare, and ''Identity'' is not terrible by any means, but there is nonetheless something depressing about seeing so many interesting actors stuffed into such an empty, ersatz vehicle.
''Identity'' 
~
Before it chokes on its own formula, the hip-hop comedy ''Malibu's Most Wanted'' tosses around enough zany notions about race, pop culture attitudes and stereotypes to prove that it has at least half a brain in its head. That's considerably more gray matter than can be found in most teenage-slanted comedies nowadays. The lightning-tongued movie, embellished with joking rap parodies, stars Jamie Kennedy as Brad Gluckman, known as B-Rad, the privileged white Los Angeles rapper he created for the WB television comedy series ''JKX: The Jamie Kennedy Experiment.'' At his most feverish, B-Rad, who lurches around gracelessly under a baseball cap worn sideways, suggests a callow, inept Eminem imitator.
B-Rad is the son of Bill Gluckman (Ryan O'Neal), a wealthy candidate for California governor who lives with his wife, Bess (Bo Derek), and son in an opulent Malibu mansion large enough to house a small army. In his moderately clever rap self-advertisement, ''Livin' in the 'Bu,'' B-Rad complains, ''Life's a beach and then you die./I could tell you stories, make your caterer cry,'' and laments a life blighted by ''margaritas, senoritas and sunsets.'' That number isn't any sillier than the father's campaign slogans, which flaunt limp homilies about Californians' being one big, happy family.
When B-Rad and his suburban crew (which includes the son of an Iranian billionaire) sabotage Dad's public appearances with spontaneous hip-hop demonstrations, Bill is so embarrassed that he hires two black actors who once appeared in a campaign ad. For $15,000 they are instructed to impersonate gangsters and kidnap his son, take him to South Central Los Angeles and stage pranks that will scare B-Rad into dropping his gangsta-rap pose and acting white.
These highly trained New York actors, Sean (Taye Diggs) and P. J. (Anthony Anderson), are utterly ignorant of the inner-city culture and have to learn its salty argot from a book. Even while immersed in their ridiculous gangsta-rapper caricatures, they have a habit of pausing to criticize each other for ''indicating'' too much. For romantic spice, they enlist Shondra (Regina Hall), an aspiring beautician who used to date an actual gangsta rapper named Tec (Damien Dante Wayans), to flirt with B-Rad.
When it works, ''Malibu's Most Wanted,'' which opens today nationwide, scores glancingly as a mischievous social satire lampooning spoiled suburban white boys who play at being black, as well as the hyper-macho attitudes and vocabulary of actual gangsta rappers. In its looniest moment, B-Rad, who has caught on to the scheme, fires two guns at once, certain that the real bullet holes peppering the cars he's aiming at are somehow faked. (They're not.) The most subversive thing about the movie is its suggestion that gangsta-rap authenticity is a pose as affected as its white suburban imitations.
In the end, the movie, directed by John Whitesell, loses its nerve. By the time B-Rad, still rapping away, finds himself a political asset to a father who has done a contrite U-turn in his feelings toward junior, the film has turned to mush as obsequious as Dad's campaign slogans. But any movie that lumps Mr. O'Neal, Ms. Derek and Snoop Dogg (as the voice of a gangsta-rap answer to Stuart Little) under the same title can't be all bad.
''Malibu's Most Wanted'' 
~
Papi, otherwise known as Tomas Fuentes (Eduardo Verastegui), is a dashing, impossibly handsome Los Angeles advertising executive who has used his frequent-flier card to establish romantic relationships with three different Latina lovelies in three different cities.
In Miami he has Cici (Sofia Vergara), a bombshell in the primordial Charo mode who works as a cocktail waitress while waiting for her big break as a professional dancer. In Chicago Papi reads love poetry with the buttoned-down Lorena (Roselyn Sanchez), a lawyer who wears gray suits and glasses but is a stunner when she takes them off. And in New York Papi's heart belongs to Patricia (Jaci Velasquez), a spoiled rich girl who has lost sight of her Latin roots, perhaps because her vision is clouded by her blue contact lenses.
The bumptious farce ''Chasing Papi,'' directed by Linda Mendoza from a script credited to no less than four writers, asks what would happen if all three of Papi's girlfriends showed up on the doorstep of his Los Angeles home at the same time.
An old-fashioned, Lupe Velez-style catfight is, unfortunately, out of the question in these enlightened times. Instead, after some brief, initial hostility, the three women form a support group and gently lead each other to life-changing revelations, like Cici's discovery that she's not just a pretty face, Lorena's realization that she can be both smart and sexy, and Patricia's sudden understanding that being Latina is nothing to be ashamed of. All of this self-actualization is accompanied by some of the most tiresome slapstick to be seen since the premature retirement of Pauly Shore. The spectator soon comes to envy Papi, who, after washing down a handful of tranquilizers with Scotch, spends most of the movie unconscious.
Safely anesthetized, he gets to miss the ladies' not-so-hilarious invasion of a hotel where a Miss Latin America contest is being conducted, as well as the two painfully unfunny comic gangsters who are after a satchel of cash in Cici's trunk and the F.B.I. agent (Lisa Vidal) who is after the money herself. A nonstop underscore of Latin pop, as well as several arbitrarily interpolated dream sequences and animated passages don't do nearly enough to make up for the film's unfocused frenzy and lack of genuine comic invention.
''Chasing Papi'' has been rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It contains mildly suggestive situations and frequent lingerie modeling.
CHASING PAPI
Directed by Linda Mendoza; written by Laura Angélica Simón, Steven Antin, Alison Balian and Elizabeth Sarnoff, based on a story by Ms. Simón and Mr. Antin; director of photography, Xavier Perez Grobet; edited by Maysie Hoy; music by Emilio Estefan Jr.; production designer, Candi Guterres; produced by Tracey Trench, Ms. Simón and Forest Whitaker; released by Fox 2000 Pictures. Running time: 80 minutes. This film 
~
In ''Bulletproof Monk'' Chow Yun-Fat and Seann William Scott are a multicultural, multigenerational mentor-and-protégé team uniting to prevent a precious Tibetan text called the Scroll of the Ultimate from falling into the wrong hands, which in this case are the hands of a very nasty Nazi (Karel Roden) who still dreams of world domination. I doubt there is much more I can say that will influence your opinion of this movie, which opens nationwide today. There are, generally speaking, two kinds of people in the modern film audience: those who care about defending the Scroll of the Ultimate and those who don't.
It's not entirely clear which group Paul Hunter, who directed this Hong Kong-style action comedy, or Ethan Rieff and Cyrus Voris, who adapted the screenplay from a popular comic book, belong to, and this turns out to be a good thing. Too much seriousness can be fatal to a picture like this one, since it impedes the efficient delivery of dumb laughter and easy thrills.
The prologue, set in Tibet in 1943, establishes the right tone, as two Tibetan monks, speaking their native language accompanied by subtitles, suddenly switch to English, suggesting that neither consistency nor verisimilitude is a very high priority. Then, just to confirm that impression, there is a lot of shooting and some twirling-and-flying martial arts acrobatics.
Sixty years later the surviving monk (Mr. Chow), rendered immune to age by the scroll's awesome power (and perhaps by a limited prosthetics budget), arrives in an anonymous North American city, hoping to find his successor. The most unlikely -- and therefore the obvious -- candidate is a pickpocket (Mr. Scott) who also works at a rundown Kung Fu cinema, where he has taught himself to fight (sloppily, according to his mentor's accurate estimate).
The young man calls himself Kar, the punning possibilities of which are exploited only once, by his love interest, rival and fellow adept, the lovely Jade (Jaime King). ''How do you like my armored car, Kar?'' she asks, with exquisite timing, just after she has smacked the living daylights out of him on the living-room floor of her mansion, a fight that serves as a bracing substitute for a sex scene. Then they climb into said car and head off to confront the Nazi and his evil blond granddaughter (Victoria Smurfit).
Do Kar, Jade and the monk (whom the pair refer to as ''monk'') save the scroll, and thus the world? Guess. Or don't. The pleasures of this movie are not to be found in the subtlety or persuasiveness of its plot, whose very haphazardness seems like a homage to the cheap, gritty glory days of Hong Kong cinema, when sensation always trumped sense. The lighting is bad, the editing of the action sequences sometimes messy, but these infelicities, curiously enough, increase the fun rather than diminishing it.
Whether the weary, patient amusement Mr. Chow registers as he trips over his English lines belongs to the actor or the lama he plays is hardly relevant; his charisma is infinite, and he finds a perfect foil in the slack-jawed, manic Mr. Scott. They seem to be having a very good time, and why should they be the only ones?
Bulletproof Monk 
~
Only 1,000? That seems like a conservative estimate of the body count in ''House of 1,000 Corpses,'' written and directed by the heavy-metal rocker Rod Zombie, which opened nationwide yesterday, a tribute to the horror films of the 1970's,
Mr. Zombie (yes, it's his legally assumed name) is clearly a scholar of the roadside slash-and-slaughter movies that achieved their apotheosis with Tobe Hooper's 1974 ''Texas Chainsaw Massacre.'' Though ''Chainsaw'' is the primary citation -- Mr. Zombie's film, too, deals with a group of hapless city kids who fall into the hands of a rural family of inbred psycho-killers -- there are bits and pieces of other films, all sewn together by Mr. Zombie with the zeal of a mad doctor working on a patchwork monster. (Yes, Mr. Zombie also has one of those.)
As much as film buffs might enjoy recognizing references to ''Motel Hell'' and other drive-in classics, Mr. Zombie's encyclopedic approach to the genre results in a crowded, frenzied film in which no single idea is developed to a satisfying payoff. As the dotty, twanging Mother Firefly -- for reasons unknown, Mr. Zombie has named several of his characters for Groucho Marx's greatest roles -- the indefatigable Karen Black gamely presides over a decaying farmhouse filled with eerie pop culture detritus. Her children include Baby (Sheri Moon), a childish sexpot who lures victims to the Firefly farm; Otis (Bill Moseley), a self-styled, Manson-like messiah; and Grampa Hugo (Dennis Fimple), who eats with his mouth open.
Mr. Zombie is both too much of a stylist, always cutting away to oddball inserts, black-and-white flashbacks, negative images and much else, and too little: he is not in enough control of his means to let a mood grow and fester. And festering is what this kind of film is all about.
''House of 1,000 Corpses'' 
~
The poster for the psych-out comedy ''Anger Management'' is a peak of high concept: Adam Sandler and Jack Nicholson, nose to nose, jaws cocked to full bellow. That poster shot plays on the public perceptions of both: Mr. Sandler, the regular-guy screen idol who usually plays men with a boiling point of 12 degrees Fahrenheit, and Mr. Nicholson, the man who, in real life, whipped a golf club out of his trunk to settle a traffic argument. But what passes for a twist in this drab and punchless movie is that Mr. Sandler plays against a type he has virtually trademarked.
Mr. Sandler portrays conflict-averse Dave Buznik, an ad executive so soft-spoken that he occasionally speaks as if he had burned the roof of his mouth. Dave is caught in the middle of a huge altercation and misunderstanding on an airplane and sentenced to anger management. He is ordered by a judge to seek treatment from Dr. Buddy Rydell (Mr. Nicholson). After a few other mishaps, the court orders Buddy to move in with Dave. Buddy's manner -- smooth, rational explanations that bubble into hostile eruptions of id, in numbing alternation -- is so disruptive, he seems as much like a doctor as Dr. Bombay from the old ''Bewitched'' series. He seems to be announcing to the world that he's a charlatan, though what is eventually announced is that the halfhearted ''Management'' isn't much of a movie.
Though the picture, which opens nationwide today, is predictable -- that is, until a last-minute plot twist that's so pandering that most of us would be afraid to admit we had thought of it -- the awe-inspiring touches of absurdity in David Dorfman's script provide moments of hope.
In its instances of fragrant ridiculousness, the picture seems on the verge of becoming something new: a persecution comedy. Nearly every one of the characters is given a daffy line that defines his infantilism, with the exception of Marisa Tomei, as Dave's patient girlfriend, Linda. Some of the best lines go to the churlish, lives-to-fight war vet, Chuck, played by John Turturro, who often looks as if he's either about to become a werewolf, or Maury Povich.
Buddy is given to homilies like ''Temper is one thing we never get rid of by losing it.'' He also conjures animal metaphors for anger that make them sound as if they belong in a display case. It's a charming but petulant narcissism that must have looked great on the page and succeeds completely in only one scene. In the middle of snarling, rush-hour traffic -- and equally snarling drivers -- Buddy forces Dave to stop and join him in singing ''I Feel Pretty,'' combining arrogance and flakiness in a way that ''Analyze That,'' using the same song, could not. It's easy to forget how completely in control of his provocative voice Mr. Nicholson is, and the way it pirouettes and shimmies around Mr. Sandler is kind of wonderful.
As in ''Punch Drunk Love,'' Mr. Sandler steps out of his volatile persona here; Dave is one of the few Sandler characters who don't seem to need anger management. Dave is described as implosive, an accident waiting to happen because of repressed rage. Buddy's technique is obviously motivated to make him crack and unleash his inner Happy Gilmore. Dave is exhausted by Buddy's acting out, but his reflexes are still honed to protect himself. Mr. Sandler, who has developed a skill for playing weary sanity, has also polished his ability for underplaying surprise; evidence comes in a dry and choice line delivery about the bizarre lingerie of a self-hating beauty played in a cameo by Heather Graham.
The point is that, despite the neurotic frenzy around him, Dave is the last sane man left on the planet. But to prove it, ''Management'' packs too many special guest stars in anger appearances; Robert Merrill turns up in one at the climax, a redundant rip-off of the Bob Barker bit in ''Gilmore.'' And the big-deal cameo is such a Sandler staple that his pictures are in danger of becoming ''Son of Paleface.''
At this point, Mr. Nicholson's being shameless is about as surprising as an ''American Idol'' contestant belting out ''I Will Always Love You.'' Buddy's ablutions -- and his utter obliviousness to self-awareness, like slipping off his underwear after climbing into bed with Dave -- come off like id-stripping acting exercises. He gets away with Buddy's self-delight when his elegant raps are bizarre, borderline flirtations -- Mr. Nicholson using his erotic presence for a discomforting intimacy.
Mr. Sandler and Mr. Nicholson are two defensive talents, and it's Mr. Nicholson who finally buckles, swept onto the wave of indifference that is often the chief ingredient in Sandler vehicles. That standard flatness probably made Peter Segal an apt director for ''Management.'' In the list of adjectives that one could append to Mr. Segal, the word slick is not one of them -- that capacity seems beyond his means. Some of the movie is so primitively staged that you can almost hear someone leafing through the book of instructions that came with the camera.
Generally, such a lack of smoothness translates into a barroom-brawl energy that can keep a high-concept, no-brow picture cracking, but this doesn't happen here. In one scene, Buddy throws a fit when the breakfast that Dave serves him isn't properly done. Similarly, ''Anger Management'' is undercooked, although it feels enough like a comedy for you to swallow it if you have to.
''Anger Management'' 
~
Justin Lin, the writer and director of the teenage-wasteland drama ''Better Luck Tomorrow,'' a shrewdly tense piece of storytelling, recognizes that sometimes it's good for a filmmaker to stir up trouble. He does so by focusing on the group most often orphaned into stereotypical behavior by teenage films, Asian-Americans, who were even left out of the joke-compilation ''Not Another Teen Movie'' a couple of years ago. In the swift, compelling ''Tomorrow,'' these young people are savvy enough to trade culturally on the box into which they're supposed to fit.
Ben (Parry Shen), a naïve grind of an overachiever, is pulled into their orbit early in the picture. Running with Virgil (Jason Tobin) and Han (Sung Kang), a couple of small-time criminals, gives Ben a chance to work off some steam. Ben's bored by his burden, snaring grades and notable achievements to gain acceptance to the best colleges, so he feels he's entitled to participate in the kinds of extracurricular activities that would look out of place on a school transcript. ''Tomorrow'' recognizes that rote behavior -- and Ben is on cruise control, drifting from lane to lane -- is the most corrosive. And so does the lanky rich-boy, Daric (Roger Fan), who spots Ben's by-the-numbers demeanor because he slips through life exactly the same way.
Daric seduces Ben into using his intellectual brawn for a lucrative cheating operation, a hustle that gives the boys way too much spare cash to go along with their extra free time. And their drug-fueled hormones are kicked further into the red by the presence of Stephanie (Karin Anna Cheung), whose lissome, hottie's confidence comes with a lurid mystique: hallway rumor has it that she appeared in a pornographic film. Ben's drive to compete for her attention with Steve (John Cho), the laconic poster boy for high school cool, is what steps up the level of criminal activity. He has to show that he's up for whatever.
Dissipation and cupidity go hand in hand, and the cheat-sheet racket the boys cooked up graduates into moving stolen electronics and drugs. And the teenagers of ''Tomorrow'' find that their brains and ambition work just as well applied to the kinds of activities that don't look good on a college application.
The movie tweaks the easy money chase of ''Risky Business,'' in which the Ivy League-obsessed teenage hero found himself pimping. In ''Business,'' the suspense grew from the protagonist's fear that his parents would bust him. In ''Tomorrow,'' apparently even the characters' parents have bought into the overachiever's stereotype their children represent: the youths go unchecked because they have the complete confidence of everyone they come in contact with.
''Better Luck Tomorrow,'' which opens today in New York City and Los Angeles, at times appears to be almost like a spooky parody of one of those talk-to-your-kids public service announcements. The desperate free-floating drive of its young players translates into their energetically trying to find a place for themselves in their floating world, emptily using the hip-hop gangsta pose that has even less meaning for upper-middle-class Asian-Americans. It's a paranoid, bildungsroman of a black comedy, and the group's homeroom-based guile finally leads Ben, who eventually wants to break free, into one last potentially liberating crime. Ben knows things probably won't come to a good end, but he can't really walk away. What finally does him in is the conventional virtue of loyalty.
The picture plays off its title by starting with the bungled, bloody aftermath of a crime gone wrong and then shifts into flashback mode -- the same opening that has benefited hundreds of movies since ''Asphalt Jungle'' first popularized it in 1950 and Quentin Tarantino revived it with such adrenalized panache in ''Pulp Fiction'' that much of the world now believes he invented it.
Mr. Lin uses the voltage of the opening as a sly joke to comment on the exploitation construct of his story. Beginning with carnage provides a violent commentary on a school cliché -- a moment of pleasure, a lifetime of regret -- and Mr. Lin proceeds to make a drama whose characters' lives ebb and flow around that. Ben and Virgil are opposite poles, with Ben's ease as a counterpoint to Virgil's easy-bake hysteria. Virgil, the kind of dude everyone avoids at high school parties, is instinctively smart enough to attach himself to the one guy who can keep him relatively upright.
''Tomorrow'' also plays well because its mostly unknown cast has all the right moves. Mr. Shen's furtive Ben often seems to keep his motives even from himself, while Mr. Cho's Steve has a lazy magnetism of which he is charmingly aware. And Ms. Cheung brings a spoiled-brat allure to her role -- she's a teenage daydream who is even more self-aware than her underage egotist boyfriend, Steve.
Mr. Lin makes the anxious grasping of these kids for some kind of emotional turf -- their own need to shatter the stereotypes that bind them -- the heart of ''Better Luck Tomorrow,'' a scenario that keeps the movie's blood racing.
''Better Luck Tomorrow'' 
~
On those occasions when the comedy-concert film ''Dysfunktional Family'' gives Eddie Griffin a chance to step out of the bag that has become a package of surefire, guffaw-forcing clichés for African-American comedians -- boring mockery of square white people, low-grade homophobia, comments like the feds can't find Osama bin Laden but ''they can find my 4-foot 11-inch cousin in Compton'' -- it's worth paying attention to. But in ''Family'' that occurs with any consistency only in the last 20 minutes. There is a blueprint here for what should be the next wave of comedy-concert movies, but the filmmaking team has only used part of it.
The director, George Gallo, who first worked with Mr. Griffin in the 2001 action comedy ''Double Take,'' departs from the comedy-film format for which Richard Pryor established the gold standard in 1979 with ''Richard Pryor: Live in Concert.'' Instead, ''Family'' takes Mr. Griffin out of the stand-up scene and follows him to Kansas City, Mo., where he spends time with the real-life Griffin clan. The pursuit of pimpology is a special family interest. His Uncle Curtis is an amateur appreciator and a pornography connoisseur; after the ending credits, he is shown riffling through some of the classics in his voluminous collection.
Mr. Griffin's Uncle Bucky actually practiced the street arts. He speaks in sad, reflective tones and has a dignified, patriarchal air that contrasts slightly with his expanse of gold-capped teeth. We learn that Bucky is a former pimp and junkie: ''He pretty much got crime covered,'' Mr. Griffin cracks. Uncle Bucky was also the man who made the young Eddie believe he had stand-up potential. Uncle Bucky must have done quite a job convincing his nephew, given the bit Mr. Griffin does about being a boy and watching his uncle shoot up. The movie intersperses interview clips of his family with his high-octane stand-up act.
The clips of Mr. Griffin's relatives seem an attempt to position ''Family'' as more than just a concert film. This is a better idea than the illustrative sound effects ladled over Mr. Griffin's jokes -- he's hardly so subtle that his routines scream for embellishment. Filming Mr. Griffin's return to his roots is a noble goal; most comics lack the self-awareness to shape acts into something more than self-reverence.
In ''Family,'' which opens nationwide today, Mr. Gallo doesn't use much of the offstage material, which is too bad; it's just the approach to offer insight into a stand-up like Mr. Griffin, whose cockiness is a dare, part arrogance and part fear. When his acts get interesting, he is drawing lines that he has to force himself to cross. Or sometimes dance across -- his need to move during his stage performance suggests a low-down, hip-hop version of Sammy Davis Jr.
Mr. Griffin's inner-city-honed bravado is funny because he recognizes it's a machismo that doesn't carry much threat -- the swagger of a small man. It definitely doesn't scare his mother; when he was a wild child in need of discipline, he admits, she beat him down with everything except the reels running ''Family.''
When Gallo cuts to Mr. Griffin's mom, eyes rimmed with pain as the star recounts moments of family tension during his act, the movie veers into an area that is not as familiar and is more promising. But ''Family'' treats that as just a diversion, a rest-stop exit that the movie doesn't slow down to examine.
Armed with his immaculately kept Afro -- it's so handsomely trimmed that it seems to be on loan from the Afro Sheen Foundation -- and a mack-tastic black leather suit, Mr. Griffin has the energy of a man who functions on sheer effrontery.
He's also packing a pocketful of tricks. His exasperation -- with others and with himself -- registers in the mile-long snarl across his face. He can use that expression to get laughs without much work. But when he isn't checking himself -- or falling back on material that Mr. Pryor should receive royalties for because unimaginative comics have traded on it so often -- Mr. Griffin's journeyman efforts prove rock solid.
His best material is autobiographical, like his assessment of Holy Roller church services: ''Church is a concert for old people who don't get out too much.'' (The high-firepower profanity of his act will probably send quite a few people to church.) Caught by his own jokes, Mr. Griffin cackles in a high-pitched whisper, just like Michael Jackson, one of his idols.
And he's funny when he folds his own desires into the act, as when he talks about the corporal punishment supposedly meted out by Mr. Jackson's father, Joe: ''I wish I did have a father that beat me into fame.''
When he's just as hard on himself, Mr. Griffin mines the funk in ''Dysfunktional Family.''
''Dysfunktional Family'' 
~
Directed by Dennie Gordon
PG, 105 minutes
Credit for fast thinking has to go to the Time-Warner executive who realized that Vincente Minnelli's 1958 comedy ''The Reluctant Debutante'' was ripe for a remake after the success of the 2001 Cinderella fantasy ''The Princess Diaries.''
A result, thoroughly retooled for the audience now known as tweeners -- girls too old for Nickelodeon but not quite ready for ''The Hours'' -- is ''What a Girl Wants.'' It was directed by Dennie Gordon (''Joe Dirt'') from a script by Jenny Bicks and Elizabeth Chandler (''A Little Princess''), loosely derived from the play by William Douglas Home that inspired the Minnelli film.
What was a supporting role in the original movie -- an American teenager (Sandra Dee) who spends a season in the social whirl of aristocratic London -- is now, in the child-centric universe of contemporary Hollywood, the leading part. As portrayed by the Nickelodeon alumna Amanda Bynes, Daphne Reynolds is a frisky young woman who lives in Manhattan's Chinatown with her single mom (Kelly Preston), an aging rock musician who now plays Long Island weddings.
Daphne has never met her father, an English lord, Henry Dashwood (Colin Firth, stammering like a second-string Hugh Grant), who was tricked into breaking up with her mother before Daphne was born. Impulsively, she hops a jet to London to look him up and finds him in the midst of a campaign for the House of Commons after giving up his hereditary seat in the House of Lords. Though he's running as a populist, he's turned stuffy in the intervening years and has acquired a very proper fiancée (the wonderfully dry Anna Chancellor, who deserves a film of her own some day) and a snooty future stepdaughter (Christina Cole).
Amanda's assignment is clear: teach these doddering Old Europeans some New World funk (yes, there is a scene in which a James Brown song is performed at a coming-out ball), banish the fiancée, humiliate the pretentious daughter and reunite her biological parents. All that, and try on an awful lot of clothes.
Minnelli's comedy had its serious underpinnings: by the end of the film, a girl had become a woman. By the end of Ms. Gordon's film, which opens today nationwide, the girl is still a girl, but a girl with much cooler stuff, including a stately home, a butler and a cute British boyfriend (Oliver James). It's no longer the children who must learn to grow up, but the adults -- exemplified by Mr. Firth's character as he slips into a pair of leather pants and practices his air-guitar moves -- who are required to grow down.
''What a Girl Wants'' 
~
Directed by F. Gary Gray
R, 109 minutes
In ''A Man Apart,'' a bread-and-butter action film directed by F. Gary Gray (''The Negotiator''), Vin Diesel returns to the pseudo-proletarian persona that this child of Greenwich Village has developed in a string of recent hits, including last summer's brain-rattling spy thriller ''XXX.''
Mr. Diesel has the hulking physique and threatening demeanor of the nightclub bouncer he once was, but he has the soul of a stage-struck kid. The relatively actionless ''A Man Apart'' -- which opens today nationwide -- offers him plenty of opportunities to emote, which he does with all the coltish enthusiasm of Katharine Hepburn's character in ''Morning Glory.''
It is probably beyond the skill of any performer to make working for the Drug Enforcement Administration look like a hip, cool, socially engaged thing to do, but that is Mr. Diesel's assignment here. He's Sean Vetter, a former Los Angeles gang member who has found religion as an operative for the drug agency. With his partner and boyhood pal, Demetrius Hicks (Larenz Tate), Sean has spent seven years trying to bring down the Mexican drug lord Memo Lucero (Geno Silva), only to find, once Lucero has been safely locked away in a stylish maximum-security prison, that another ruthless mastermind, known only as Diablo (the picture's original title), has risen to take Lucero's place.
The clock is ticking on Sean's pretty wife (played by Jacqueline Obradors of ''N.Y.P.D. Blue'') from the moment they are seen romping like puppies in their tastefully furnished beach house. She's a walking revenge motive, and sure enough, we are barely into the film's third reel before she is brutally murdered by Diablo's henchman, a Beverly Hills hairdresser mincingly played by Timothy Olyphant. This is the opportunity Mr. Diesel has been waiting for to screw his face into a variety of contortions that were probably meant to express grief, anger and steely resolve but come off more like surly petulance.
So desperate is Sean for vengeance that he teams up with the imprisoned Lucero, whose wife and child have also been killed by the mysterious Diablo. A series of gun battles follow, none staged with quite enough verve or imagination to break through the pervasive torpor.
''A Man Apart'' 
~
A haunting slogan from the golden days of radio, spoken by the disembodied voice on ''The Shadow,'' was the boast: ''Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men? The Shadow knows,'' followed by an insinuating cackle. In ''Phone Booth,'' Joel Schumacher's flashy stunt of a movie, a contemporary descendant of that phantom voice unleashes a similarly nasty, all-knowing snicker every few minutes during the protracted phone conversation that consumes most of this clanking, overheated thriller.
The target of derision, Stu Shepard (Colin Farrell), is a scruffy young New York publicist who resembles an up-to-date version of Sidney Falco from ''Sweet Smell of Success.'' Stu's grubby little world is shaken one afternoon when he picks up the ringing telephone in the Midtown Manhattan phone booth he uses to make secret calls to his prospective girlfriend, Pamela McFadden (Katie Holmes), and finds himself the captive of a mysterious male caller who seems to know every detail of his life.
Pamela, an aspiring actress whom Stu has been stringing along with career advice and vague promises of introductions to showbiz biggies, is unaware that Stu is married. Nor does Stu's pretty blond wife, Kelly (Radha Mitchell), who works in a store on Columbus Avenue, realize that hubby has a wandering eye. Although gussied up with all sorts of cinematic tricks and a jittery, ticking soundtrack, ''Phone Booth,'' which Mr. Schumacher directed from a screenplay by Larry Cohen, is essentially a one-act radio play in which a sadistic voyeur with a high-powered rifle plays humiliating cat-and-mouse games with an urban everyman and taunts him into breaking down and confessing his sins.
Early on, the omniscient caller warns Stu that if he doesn't cooperate with every instruction, he will be shot dead from one of the thousands of windows looking out over the street. To prove he means business, the sniper summarily kills a loudmouthed pimp (John Enos III) who has been pestering Stu (with a baseball bat) to vacate the booth so his girls can use it to make dates.
Naturally Stu is assumed to be the killer. And when it turns out the sniper has thought ahead and stashed a gun in the roof of the booth to make him appear guilty, Stu (who came without a weapon) seems to be a goner no matter what happens. If the sniper, who again demonstrates his marksmanship by grazing one of Stu's ears, doesn't kill him, the police officers who arrive in force surely will.
''Phone Booth'' begins to lose its tenuous grip on reality once the law appears. Captain Ramey (Forest Whitaker), who leads a force of itchy-fingered sharpshooters, tries to negotiate with Stu, whom the caller coerces into inventing reasons he can't leave the booth. As the standoff drags on, what little suspense the movie had built up rapidly drains away.
Desperately stalling for time, the movie, which opens today nationwide (after being postponed from last fall because of the Washington-area sniper attacks), starts padding itself by taking tangents into the police captain's failed marriage. When a frantic Kelly appears on the scene, Stu (presumably to protect her) pretends she's a crazy woman who has been stalking him. By the time it dawns on the captain (for no particular reason other than that it's time to end the movie) that Stu may not be the killer, ''Phone Booth'' has used up its last quarter.
''Phone Booth'' is bogus on every level, right down to its half-hearted trick ending. The urban realism (foul-mouthed prostitutes and tough-talking cops) is as garishly clichéd as the media circus that builds around the killing. As a moral fable, ''Phone Booth'' is entirely meretricious. For one thing, Stu is awfully small potatoes compared with the big shots the sniper boasts of having executed in similar circumstances. Stu may have lust in his heart, but technically he still hasn't cheated. When he finally blubbers out his failures, there's nothing on the list that ought to get a metaphysical vigilante so riled up.
Mr. Farrell, who resembles a younger, bushier-eyebrowed Brad Pitt, acquits himself decently enough as the scuffling Bronx-born hustler who favors Italian suits. But this likable Irish actor, touted as Hollywood's studly flavor of the last several months, ultimately lacks the soulful magnetism that signifies a major screen presence.
So what is ''Phone Booth'' good for? If you want to soak in some more bad urban vibes to add to the ones already floating around, the movie could be your masochistic treat.
''Phone Booth'' 
~
There is a built-in poignancy to any story of a son searching for clues to the identity of a father he barely knew. But in the case of Nathaniel Kahn, the illegitimate son of the great architect Louis I. Kahn, who died in 1974, that poignancy has an extra twinge, since this mostly absent father strove so diligently to remain a man of mystery.
When Kahn collapsed and died of a heart attack in the men's room at Pennsylvania Station, he had been deemed by some to be the greatest living American architect, but his body remained unidentified for two days. At his death he was hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt.
Nathaniel Kahn was 11 at the time, and the personal documentary he has made, ''My Architect,'' which the New Directors/New Films festival is showing tonight at Alice Tully Hall and tomorrow at the Gramercy Theater, is a record of his quest to put together the pieces of his father's compartmentalized life. Kahn, it turned out, juggled three families for many years, one official and two not. He was so secretive about his triple life that many of his colleagues didn't even know he was married.
Kahn's official family consisted of his wife, Esther, and a daughter, Sue Ann. Nathaniel discovered that his father also had another daughter, Alexandra, by Anne Tyng, an architectural colleague. Nathaniel's mother, Harriet Pattison, a landscape architect, succeeded Ms. Tyng as Kahn's extramarital partner. When Kahn died, his wife tried to prevent the two other women from attending the funeral, but they went anyway and sat in the back.
As Nathaniel recalls his occasional encounters with his father, the architect's comings and goings from one family to another had the feel of a cloak-and-dagger operation. At the conclusions of these brief meetings -- the memories of which Nathaniel clings to with a boyish pathos -- Kahn would vanish like a phantom into the night.
The son's quest involves interviewing the other women and their children and arranging a meeting of the children to compare notes. Of the women in Kahn's life, only Esther, who died in 1996, does not appear, except in a videotaped interview from earlier times. The son's search is one of three strands of a story that the movie weaves into a meticulously structured portrait of a complicated man who remains elusive even after key elements of the puzzle have been pieced together.
The two other strands are a biography of Kahn and a survey of his buildings, which include an addition to the Yale Art Gallery (his first major work, in 1953); the Salk Institute, overlooking the Pacific in La Jolla; the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth; and his grandest achievement, the capital of Bangladesh in Dacca. That sprawling government complex, begun in the 1960's, wasn't completed until 1983. It is suggested that one reason Kahn never completed a major building in Philadelphia, his home city, was the anti-Semitism of its upper-crust society.
The picture of Kahn that emerges is of a dreamer, an eccentric workaholic and a late bloomer who traveled continually and was always in debt. Born in Estonia in 1901, he moved to Philadelphia at 5. Physically unprepossessing, he stood only 5 feet 6 inches. As a small boy he was caught in a gas fire that left his face disfigured. It is speculated that the grainy surfaces of his buildings were reflections of his scarred face.
Kahn's style didn't begin to take shape until the 1950's, when he traveled to Rome and became fascinated with the city's ruins. The weighty geometric style that emerged, which involved enormous concrete blocks and evoked the purposeful solidity of heavy industry, looked way beyond the sleek steel-and-glass minimalism of other modernists to aspire to a timeless monumentality.
In its formality and dispassion, the son's movie oddly mirrors the father's architecture. The creation of something meant for the ages, be it a building or a film, isn't an endeavor to be undertaken lightly.
MY ARCHITECT
Written and directed by Nathaniel Kahn; director of photography, Bob Richman; edited by Sabine Krayenbuehl; music by Joseph Vitarelli; produced by Susan Rose Behr and Mr. Kahn. Running time: 116 minutes. This film is not rated. Shown tonight at 6 at Alice Tully Hall and tomorrow at noon at the MoMA Gramercy, 127 East 23rd Street, Manhattan, as part of the 32nd New Directors/New Films series of the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the department of film and media of the Museum of Modern Art.
WITH: Nathaniel Kahn (Narrator) and Philip Johnson, Vincent Scully, I. M. Pei, Anne Tyng, Edmund Bacon, Richard Saul Wurman, Frank Gehry, Robert Boudreau, Harriet Pattison, Susannah Jones, Charles Jones, Priscilla Pattison, Edwina Pattison Daniels, Robert A. M. Stern, Teddy Kollek, Ruth Chesin, Moshe Safdie, Sue Ann Kahn, Alexandra Tyng, Duncan Buell and Shamsul Wares.

~
Is the United States ready for a black president? On the Fox television series ''24,'' the answer is yeah, sure, what's the big deal? But ''Head of State,'' a raggedy new comedy from the brilliant comic brain of Chris Rock, cannot quite make up its mind. Which is not surprising. If memory serves, it was Mr. Rock who first observed, back in the Clinton era, that we already had one, not something anyone would say, even in jest, about the current commander in chief.
So the answer may depend on what you mean by black. Does the term define a skin color, a cultural style, a world view or some ever-shifting combination of these and other elements? W. E. B. Du Bois predicted that the problem of the 20th century would be the problem of the color line. In the 21st, the line is still around, but it has become tangled and blurred, as Mr. Rock, in his hard-nosed, truth-telling stand-up act, has been among the most adept at pointing out. But the very confusion that has made him so unpredictable and funny onstage makes this on-screen exploration of contemporary racial mythologies curiously tentative and unfocused.
Mr. Rock plays Mays Gilliam, a dedicated, idealistic alderman in Washington who will do anything for the residents of his hard-bitten, impoverished ward and who receives nothing but grief in return. His fiancée (a desperately overacting Robin Givens) dumps him, his car is repossessed, his office shut down and his bicycle run over by a bus. He is nonetheless spotted by some scheming political operatives (Dylan Baker and Lynn Whitfield) from an unidentified political party and drafted to replace their presidential candidate, who has been killed in a plane crash 10 weeks before Election Day. Mays is a patsy, a designated loser whose defeat will clear the way for an ambitious, unscrupulous senator (James Rebhorn) to lead the party next time.
But Mays, with his plain-spoken populism, upsets their plans by becoming a legitimate contender, and this is where the movie begins to flounder. At the start, he is an earnest man of the people, dressed in denim shirts and sneakers. But when he breaks away from his handlers to reinvent himself, it is in full hip-hop effect, with Kangol caps and Sean John sweat suits, a macked-out tour bus and a slogan that goes ''Vote for Mays, Ya Heard?''
At this point, the movie seems to be heading into a predictable racial scheme of the kind most recently put forward in the wildly popular ''Bringing Down the House,'' wherein black people are depicted as loud, irresponsible and authentic, while whites are uptight, power-hungry and phony. The humor comes when the stereotypes confront each other or try to switch places.
All I can say is, I'm not down with that. Nor am I feeling it. And neither, I suspect, is Mr. Rock, who directed ''Head of State'' and wrote the screenplay with his frequent writing partner Ali LeRoi. They seem at once to want to avail themselves of the easy laughs these stereotypes can elicit and to break free of them altogether. The only time this really works is when Mays takes over the turntable at his first fund-raiser, and the well-heeled, pale-skinned, middle-aged guests break into a hip-shaking electric slide. But for the most part, the picture's timidity, combined with haphazard plotting and uninspired direction, just makes a mess of Mays's character. He seems to be a different person in every scene, with no consistent motive and no capacity to undergo any interesting dramatic change.
Nor are the satiric possibilities of the film's premise addressed, and the result is a political comedy that refuses to address a single real political topic. It is all well and good to poke fun at the empty, platitudinous dishonesty of political oratory, but the mockery is blunted when the opposing view is just the same boilerplate in more vivid language. What does Mays stand for? Better schools, better-paying jobs and public transportation. Just imagine: a politician brave enough to stand up and call for such things. What would that be like?
''Head of State,'' which opens nationwide today, wastes time on an irrelevant romantic subplot (which does at least give the charming Tamala Jones something to do). It is best when Mr. Rock gives up trying to act and uses Mays's speeches to deliver versions of his own stand-up routines, and when Bernie Mac, playing the candidate's brother and running mate, brings on his tripwire volatility and his cunning, profane charisma.
The two comedians have achieved a cross-racial following because they uphold the tradition of comedy as a form of truth-telling. ''I say the things y'all can't,'' Mr. Mac said in ''The Original Kings of Comedy,'' the concert film that paved the way for his ascension to the role of un-P.C. post-Cosby patriarch on Fox. The real division that ''Head of State'' acknowledges, and that it sadly fails to exploit, is not really between races but between a political culture built on blandness, sameness and dishonesty and a popular culture, incarnated by the movie's hip-hop soundtrack, that is polymorphous, candid and profane. We know which side Chris Rock is on. The problem is that neither we nor he can be altogether sure about Mays Gilliam.
''Head of State'' 
~
I'm not sure a movie title could be any less appropriate than ''Basic''; it makes less sense than any explanation the cast could possibly offer for appearing in this ridiculous procedural thriller. For the actors, at least, there is what Balzac called the purest of motives: money. But because no one will be paid to see this film -- or in this case, paid enough to see it -- questions over its existence will continue to plague us.
Someone decided to put ''Rashomon'' in a Cuisinart along with ''A Few Good Men,'' ''The Usual Suspects'' and ''A Soldier's Story,'' and hit the pulverize button while forgetting to replace the top. The outcome is a spewing mess spinning at 300 r.p.m.
In Panama six Army Rangers go on a training exercise in the worst movie storm since the tornado in ''The Wizard of Oz,'' a film that seems like a pinnacle of real-world logic by comparison. They are led into the storm by their volatile, violently demanding -- and, of course, violently detested -- African-American troop leader, Sergeant West (Samuel L. Jackson).
An investigation begins after only two men return alive. From the helicopter coming to pick up the squad, the base commander, Colonel Styles (Tim Daly), can see the men firing at one another. One survivor, Dunbar (Brian Van Holt), refuses to speak to anyone but a fellow Ranger. He remains silent while being questioned by the investigating officer, Lieutenant Osborne (Connie Nielsen). And because Styles wants the investigation concluded before Dunbar has to be shipped off to Washington, he brings in a ringer.
''Basic'' gives John Travolta the opportunity to do what he does best: make an entrance, which makes sense because he has had more of them than anyone since Loretta Young. He plays the bad-apple D.E.A. agent Hardy, who swaggers into camera range singing to himself, and sounding remarkably like Tony Bennett, while swilling a long-neck beer with a towel around his new Pilates-assisted fabulousity. (This movie could be subtitled ''How Johnny Got His Six-Pack.'') The only restraint he shows in the role is not dropping to the floor to whip through a set of sit-ups.
Hardy is under investigation for suspicion of accepting a bribe. But he goes back a long way with Styles and, more important -- and improbable -- he also trained under West, whom he also hated. Hardy doesn't get to say, ''I'm all you've got, man!,'' but he might as well. Styles brings Hardy in to interrogate Dunbar and to find out what went wrong.
At this point you might be tempted to say, ''Huh?'' Or, if you're in the theater, to leave. But wait -- there's less. The rogue Hardy is one of those inventive investigators who throw out the rule book. (Hardy's arbitrary behavior brings to mind Sharon Stone in ''Basic Instinct.'') When Hardy goes into the box -- the room where Dunbar is being kept -- the director John McTiernan develops some tension. If this picture works at all, it is only in certain scenes. Mr. Travolta's cool-for-cats bravado is served up beautifully, and for a few moments it seems that ''Basic'' is going somewhere -- he bullies and sweet-talks Dunbar simultaneously. But soon it is clear that ''Basic'' is adrift.
''Basic,'' which opens nationwide today, takes place in flashbacks. It is revealed that there may have been a drug-smuggling ring mashed into the hatred that everyone had for West, especially the young African-American Ranger Pike (Taye Diggs). West brutalizes him for sport, and uses the race they share as a strap to demean Pike.
Any story with an unreliable narrator has to be about finding a greater truth or the depth of illusion. Actually, ''Basic'' has several of these truths because Hardy also interrogates the other survivor, Kendall (Giovanni Ribisi). Mr. Ribisi's performance spells out the dangers of trying to imitate David Thewlis and Peter Lorre. And because Kendall's story is a radical departure from Dunbar's -- and none of the other soldiers are alive to dispute their stories -- Hardy has few places to turn.
''Basic'' is so desperate to get to its nonsensical ending that it sinks to having a dying man write a clue with his own blood. And a clue that has to be misread initially. Usually mysteries rely on leaving clues for the viewers to pick up, so that their attention to the story and the unfolding details are rewarded. But ''Basic'' keeps inventing plot turns -- it is as if the picture is working the same way that Hardy does, trying to get us so confused and frustrated that we give up.
Unfortunately, we do, sighing in resignation and waiting for the ending, which ties things up in the most perfunctory way possible, like a high school version of ''Mission: Impossible.'' (Incredibly, it seems to be setting itself up for a sequel.) This movie seems so bored with itself that it pulls non sequitur plot twists out of very thin air.
Probably the reason most people will be interested in ''Basic'' is for a reteaming of Mr. Travolta and Mr. Jackson for the first time since ''Pulp Fiction.'' They get only one good moment together, and this picture could have the effect of negating the heat that ''Pulp Fiction'' put under them. Mr. Travolta may be the only star in movies making choices as bad as Cuba Gooding Jr., and each of the stupendous flops they turn up in is heartbreaking because both actors have such powerful audience rapport, as does Mr. Jackson, which makes ''Basic'' even more of a disappointment.
Mr. Travolta looks better than he has in years in his tight black T-shirt (despite his Mr. Spock haircut), and he turns smoking cigarettes into performance art. (You may concentrate on this because it's all he has going for him.) He doesn't get anything going with Ms. Nielsen because their scenes are too on-the-nose, and her indeterminate accent doesn't help. (She seems to be from New Orleans, Minn.) One glamour shot, in which Mr. Travolta leans over to speak with Ms. Nielsen in her car as an oscillating glow backlights the rain, offers, and promises, more than the rest of the picture. All the rain in ''Basic'' is an elemental problem, though; the constant tapping of the rain has a lulling effect. It is almost saying, ''Go to sleep, soon this will all be over.''
''Basic'' 
~
Directed by Francis Glebas
G, 75 minutes
The amiable tone of ''Piglet's Big Movie,'' a charmer of a family film spun off from A. A. Milne's ''Winnie-the-Pooh'' books, is an eight-song suite written and performed by Carly Simon that distills the chipper spirit of Milne's late-1920's classic stories, while adding a distinct contemporary flavor.
Ms. Simon's songwriting strengths have always been an unguarded emotional directness and a gift for bluntly catchy tunes. Along with an attitude of openhearted playfulness and readiness for adventure, these qualities lend her lyrics and singing (in a voice that's noticeably lighter than the more emphatic style of her pop hits) a bracing folk-pop buoyancy. One of the catchiest numbers is a perky little march, ''Sing Ho for the Life of the Bear,'' which Ms. Simon adapted from Milne's own words.
This Disney animated film is the sequel to ''The Tigger Movie,'' released three years ago, and it features most of the same characters (voiced by most of same actors). Besides its gung-ho score, what keeps its saccharine content at a tolerable level is the thread of literary whimsy that runs through Brian Hohlfeld's screenplay. One of the delights of Milne's stories is their celebration of the way children invent language as they learn it, twisting familiar words into semiprivate language.
''Piglet's Big Movie'' cleverly compacts several Milne tales into a sequence of anecdotes illustrating the heroism of the little pig who, being the smallest member of the Pooh tribe, is underappreciated by his friends. Mr. Hohlfeld and the director, Francis Glebas, have skillfully woven them into a lighthearted fable about loyalty and recognition of your friends' strengths. The adapted tales include ''In Which Kanga and Baby Roo Come to the Forest, and Piglet Has a Bath,'' ''In Which Christopher Robin Leads an Expedition to the North Pole'' and ''In Which a House Is Built at Pooh Corner for Eeyore.''
Those characters are defined as much by voice as by appearance. Pink-eared Piglet (John Fiedler), in his trademark scarf, speaks in a plucky little-boy squeak. Continuing a Disney tradition that began with other actors in 1968, Jim Cummings's perfectly voiced Pooh (he also plays Tigger) has the voice of a lovable, scatterbrained fussbudget. And the deep-voiced drawl of Peter Cullen's Eeyore conveys a likable befuddlement. Christopher Robin (Tom Wheatley) appears only briefly as the mastermind of an expedition to the North Pole that goes nowhere.
The stories are stitched together into a Piglet retrospective, in which the denizens of the Hundred Acre Wood conduct a search for the missing pig, guided by clues from his personal scrapbook. In recalling how Piglet repeatedly saved the day in one risky adventure after another they realize how beloved he is to them.
The movie, which opens today nationwide, tells its story plainly, with a minimum of gimmickry and hyperkinetic action. The spare, lightly textured illustration is true to the spirit of the E. K. Shepard drawings for the Milne books. In the knockabout world of animated movies, ''Piglet's Big Movie'' is an oasis of gentleness and wit.   STEPHEN HOLDEN

~
The heroes of ''Dreamcatcher,'' Pete, Jonesy, Beaver and Henry, are old boyhood chums, now grown up into a posse of wisecracking bachelors, played by Timothy Olyphant, Damian Lewis, Jason Lee and Thomas Jane. The four share unusual powers of clairvoyance, thanks to their association, as children, with a supernaturally gifted retarded boy called Duddits.
They also share a number of cute, sarcastic catchphrases, the most useful of which, within the movie and in reference to it, is ''S.S.D.D.'' The letters stand, more or less, for Same Stuff, Different Day, which pretty well sums up a film critic's life in the late winter and early spring. The achievement of ''Dreamcatcher,'' which opens today nationwide, is that it manages to impact about a week's worth of stuff into about two and a quarter hours. If you think of it that way, as five or six bad movies squished together, it almost seems like a bargain.
Since we are tiptoeing around scatological matters, I should note that one of the movies inside ''Dreamcatcher'' is a comedy of gastrointestinal distress. The malevolent space aliens that have landed in the Maine woods, you see, dispatch slithery worms, which burrow deep into human bowels only to emerge in roaring, carnivorous fury. One of these leaps from a snowbank as one of the unlucky friends is writing Duddits's name in the snow with urine, and the creature's teeth find a predictable target.
If this were an episode of ''South Park,'' I would be all for it, since the phantasmogorical crudity would ultimately bend toward a satire of all that is pious, high-minded and therapeutic in our culture. But ''Dreamcatcher,'' adapted from Stephen King's novel by William Goldman and Lawrence Kasdan, was directed and co-produced by Mr. Kasdan, a leading exponent of pious, high-minded and therapeutic cinema.
It is not necessarily surprising that he should have been drawn to science-fiction horror. His screenwriting career, which includes several ''Indiana Jones'' and ''Star Wars'' pictures, suggests an affinity for popular genres balanced alongside the taste for polite baby-boomer melodrama like ''The Big Chill'' and ''Grand Canyon.'' The wonder is that Mr. Kasdan should prove, as a horror director, to be so utterly incompetent, completely indifferent to the special discipline that fright imposes.
I went into ''Dreamcatcher'' hoping -- somewhat perversely, given the state of the world outside -- for a good scare and found myself before long howling with laughter. There is so much going on, and it is all so poorly integrated, that watching the movie from start to finish is like listening to Stephen King's Greatest Hits played by an earnest but talentless tribute band. The boyhood chums united against monstrous evil recalls ''It,'' with the psychic powers of ''The Dead Zone'' and the chummy sentimentality of ''Stand by Me'' thrown in for good measure. There is a little American Indian mysticism, as in ''Cujo'' (a dreamcatcher is an Indian ritual object much prized by New Age tourists) and some troubled animals.
And there is much more. The aliens have apparently been attacking us for some time, and one subplot takes us into an elite Army unit devoted to fighting back. It is commanded by Morgan Freeman, many of whose lines sound like desperate, half-joking pleas for understanding, directed at the audience. ''I'm getting old for this sort of thing,'' he says, looking as tired as some of us feel watching him confer his wry dignity on a project that hardly deserves it. Mr. Freeman's second in command is played by Tom Sizemore, who I kept expecting to sprout new rows of fangs and turn into a snarling, voracious space worm.
Because, you see, these aliens are able to change shape, in addition to spreading a highly infectious red fungus, slipping into people's colons and all the rest. One, for instance, occupies the body of Jonesy, one of the four pals, who is exiled into a secret annex of his own brain, which appears to be some kind of warehouse. Even in this metaphorical, mental world, poor Jonesy must walk with a limp, the result of a car accident early in the film. Meanwhile, the space creature inhabiting his physical form speaks in a chirpy British accent. (He even says ''guv'nor.'') Why? Well, obviously, because these spaceships came from England. Duh.
One thing the invaders cannot do, however, is use a crowbar to open a manhole cover, which is a good thing, because otherwise we'd all be speaking -- well, English, I guess. Do not think I am spoiling anything. Everything here is so clumsily handled that the creepy sensation of dread that infuses the early moments is quickly washed away on a tide of space slime and wearying exposition.
Except for the stoical Mr. Jane, the four friends are twitchy and jokey in a way that's meant to be charming but that is sufficiently annoying to make you wonder which of their characters you hope to see killed off first. There are almost no women in the whole picture, which may be taken either as a sign of imaginative limitation on the part of Mr. Kasdan and Mr. King or as a testament to feminine good sense.
''Dreamcatcher'' 
~
Directed by Mort Nathan
R, 95 minutes
Whom do you feel sorrier for, the cast of ''Boat Trip'' or their children? Remember, kids can be very cruel -- and this latest ''get Cuba Gooding Jr. career counseling fast'' project is a misfire from beginning to end.
Mr. Gooding plays Jerry, who is in mourning over the breakup of his relationship with Felicia (Vivica A. Fox). The barking hound-dog Nick (Horatio Sanz) talks Jerry into joining him on a singles cruise, but the travel agent they anger gets his revenge by booking the pair on a gay singles cruise. ''Boat Trip'' goes down faster than the Titanic and is far more deserving of its fate.
''Boat Trip,'' which opens nationwide today, is a series of flashing semaphores that signal its dreariness. It has the most exhausted collection of song clichés this side of a Time-Life oldies collection, from James Brown's ''I Feel Good'' all the way to the eventual cover of ''I Will Survive.'' What's missing from this motley medley is a tune by Cuba Gooding Sr.: ''Everybody Plays the Fool.''
The junior Gooding has shown himself to be a game actor, and he is fearless at throwing his entire being into pictures that seem to exist to prove that he can be in something worse than the last movie you saw him in. If ''Boat Trip'' were screened on a cruise ship, most of the passengers would be dog-paddling back to shore.
''Boat Trip'' is more tiresome and dumb than actually bad. A scant 10 minutes or so after Mr. Sanz has wrung every exasperated take out of his surprise at being on a gay cruise -- and still goes on with it anyway -- the movie introduces something that could only pass as a subplot to people stranded at sea. The Swedish women's suntanning team joins the cruise, giving Nick another reason to pop his eyes wide open. And another reason to flinch -- he is kept at bay from the brown-and-serve cuties by the authoritarian tanning team captain, Sonya (Lin Shaye, in another of her grim-visaged roles). When Nick isn't being chased off by Sonya, he is being stalked by an aged gay pursuer, Lloyd (Roger Moore).
Jerry finds his own heartthrob on board: the ship's dance instructor, Gabriella (Roselyn Sanchez), a straight woman who is working a gay cruise to put some distance between herself and lying hetero men. What happens between the two of them is as predictable as the never-ending phallic jokes -- a surfeit of single-entendres -- that are festooned across the boat decks by the director, Mort Nathan. The legend ''A Mort Nathan Film'' got one of the biggest laughs at the depressed screening I attended.
Between Mr. Gooding's relentless energy and Mr. Sanz's impish gleam -- he may be the only heavyset ''Saturday Night Live'' cast member whose comic approach isn't inspired by self-hatred -- they have the potential to make a likable comedy team. But it's unlikely anyone would pair them again after ''Boat Trip'': the foreign film Oscar nominee from the Netherlands will enjoy bigger box-office returns than this picture.
Probably the next time we see Mr. Gooding on screen, he'll be getting a stern lecture on learning to love himself from Dr. Phil.
''Boat Trip'' 
~
What is Gwyneth Paltrow doing squandering her talents on a wan little airline comedy like ''View From the Top''? This satire of flight attendants and their career problems is so toothless and scatterbrained that it doesn't really deserve to be called a satire. What keeps it watchable is the unquenchable charm of its star, whose character, Donna Jensen, metamorphoses from a clumsy, panicked freshman recruit for a small California airline into a confident, jet-setting attendant for a top-of-the-line international carrier.
But what is success without love? Our gal Donna believes she has it all until she finds herself alone in her dream city of Paris at Christmastime and realizes she would chuck everything just to be reunited with the true-blue boyfriend she left behind in Cleveland. Did I say ''ick''?
Ms. Paltrow is not the only star in the film who tries gamely to churn this cinematic glass of diluted skim milk into something resembling butter. Mike Myers has a one-joke supporting role as John Whitney, a robotic trainer of flight attendants for Royalty Airlines who is painfully self-conscious about the crossed right eye that prevented him from becoming a steward. That soulful human teddy bear, Mark Ruffalo, is Donna's oh-so-sincere sweetheart, Ted, a law school dropout from Cleveland whom she meets while he's on hiatus working for the shore patrol at Lake Havasu.
Kelly Preston is Sherry, and Christina Applegate is Christine, fellow trainees with whom Donna forms a tight clique of mutual support, or at least it seems so at the beginning. Christine, who radiates major slut vibes from the moment she appears, turns out to be less than a friend. The movie reaches its nadir in a scene in which she physically attacks Donna and instigates one of the most awkward and embarrassing catfights ever filmed.
The only role with a hint of satirical baby teeth is Donna's fanatically success-oriented mentor, Sally Weston (Candice Bergen). Ms. Bergen puts on a modified Southern accent for the role, which is the latest in her growing gallery of grinning, fiery-eyed career women who seem molded in steel. Sally is America's ranking super-stewardess, the author of the best seller ''My Life in the Sky'' and a woman noted for having butted heads with Dr. Phil on ''Oprah'' and come out the winner.
''View From the Top'' has been on the shelf for some time; the official reason is that it would have been inappropriate to release an airline comedy in the wake of 9/11. But its flimsiness and questionable commercial outlook may also have played a part.
Had it been released earlier, ''View From the Top'' would still have felt oddly and uncomfortably out of date, its references to Dr. Phil and Oprah notwithstanding. Its pop soundtrack uses the Fifth Dimension's ''Up Up and Away'' (1967) for liftoff and Cyndi Lauper's ''Time After Time'' (1984) for romance.
The world the film portrays of jiggly, frozen-smiled babes swiveling down the aisles of jetliners harks back to the swinging 60's and 70's, when female flight attendants were called stewardesses and had the same erotic mystique as cheerleaders. (Recently Steven Spielberg's ''Catch Me If You Can'' depicted the same world with far more style and sophistication.) At Sierra, the tiny California airline where Donna gets her start, the attendants are togged out like showgirls in fluorescent blue microminiskirts and skintight tops. The one male flight attendant recognized by the movie is a gay stereotype named Randy (Joshua Malina), who is several cuts in subtlety below ''Will and Grace.''
Ms. Paltrow is ultimately miscast as Donna, a showgirl's daughter from Silver Spring, Nev., who dreams of a more cosmopolitan life after seeing Sally Weston on television. Even wearing big hair and putting on the hint of a working-class accent, this actress exudes too much refinement for the role. The movie muffs its first big comic opportunity when Donna, who has never flown before, is freaked out by some minor turbulence during her maiden voyage and lurches down the aisle screaming, ''We're going to crash!''
The undernourished plot, scraped together by Eric Wald, follows Donna from Sierra to Royalty Express in Cleveland, where she shares an apartment with Ted, whose cozy-as-bugs-in-a-rug family members all don identical maroon sweaters for their annual Christmas portrait. When Paris, first-class, calls, Donna just can't resist.
''View From the Top,'' which opens nationwide today, was directed by the Brazilian-born filmmaker Bruno Barreto (''Four Days in September,'' ''Bossa Nova,'' ''Carried Away''), who should have known better than to take an assignment that leaves him stranded in the sky somewhere between Podunk and the moon.
''View From the Top'' 
~
Directed by Harald Zwart
PG, 110 minutes
Film criticism, having always existed on the edge of irrelevance, finds itself plunging into the pit with the latest generation of Hollywood formula films, which are so indebted to cloning and cross-fertilization that aesthetics seem less to the point than genetics.
The DNA of ''Agent Cody Banks'' seems a recombinant version of ''Spy Kids,'' with its amusing notion of a couple of grade schoolers taking over the derring-do and gadgetry of their kidnapped parents to rescue them, with some chromosomes spliced in from teenage television: namely, Frankie Muniz, the shy, sweet kid of ''Malcolm in the Middle,'' and Hilary Duff, the teenage beauty who plays the endearingly klutzy Lizzie McGuire on the Disney Channel show of the same name.
This Frankenfilm comes lumbering out of the laboratory of the Danish director Harald Zwart, any trace of personality surgically removed and replaced by a fully road-tested cliché. Cody, the 15-year-old played by Mr. Muniz, is, in the film's only really amusing notion, a sleeper agent for the C.I.A., having been trained in the latest spy and self-defense techniques at a training base disguised as an innocent summer camp.
When an eccentric scientist played by Martin Donovan (an indie favorite, appearing in what is probably his highest-budget film to date) invents a nanotech bug capable of devouring the guidance system of American satellites, Cody is drawn out of deep hibernation (a k a high school) to ''get close'' to the Donovan character's entrancing teenage daughter, Natalie (Ms. Duff). As skilled as he may be in martial arts, Cody still hasn't learned to talk to girls, a skill he acquires in a crash course conducted by his sexy C.I.A. handler, played by Angie Harmon in cleavage-enhancing jumpsuits.
With far better special effects that the endearingly low-budget ''Spy Kids'' had at its disposal, ''Agent Cody Banks,'' which opens today nationwide, emerges as a more polished, more professional production overall, but one without the impish personality that made ''Spy Kids'' seem like an amiable blend of ''Spin and Marty'' and ''From Russia With Love.'' Some of the violence here feels uncomfortably authentic; a greater element of fantasy and playfulness would have defused it.
Not that the preteenage audience that ''Agent Cody Banks'' is gunning for will necessarily notice, but the cast includes a number of gifted supporting players, including the much-missed Cynthia Stevenson as Cody's mom, Keith David as the blustery C.I.A. chief and Darrell Hammond as the C.I.A.'s answer to Q of the James Bond films. The real star for young audiences will probably be the Segway Human Transporters -- those things that look like old-fashioned lawnmowers with a place to stand -- that the agents use to buzz around headquarters.
Those headquarters apparently have been relocated from Virginia to Vancouver. But why should the C.I.A. pass up the advantages of the low Canadian dollar any more than Hollywood does?
''Agent Cody Banks'' has been rated PG (Parents strongly cautioned) for its bloodless violence, mild vulgarity and occasional sexual innuendo.   DAVE KEHR

~
The remake of the 1971 gothic thriller ''Willard'' may be comically overblown and made of cardboard, but it includes one element guaranteed to give even the most hardened aficionados of horror a moment of pause: its multiplying population of rats.
The crude Freudian fable of a cowering mama's boy who mobilizes an army of rodents to do his vengeful bidding uses 500 flesh-and-blood rats in addition to animatronic and computer-generated creatures. As they swarm through the movie, leaving their droppings along the way, they conjure a creepy vision of remorseless appetite.
How scary are they? Not particularly. When flesh is gnawed and blood lapped up, the camera shies away from the carnage, leaving most of the gore to the imagination. ''Willard'' also fails to imbue either of the two principal rodents -- a small, sleek white creature named Socrates, and a gigantic, coarse brown-furred monster named Ben -- with any personality beyond their obvious symbolism.
According to the film's production notes, one crowd scene using all 500 of the critters required 10 animal trainers to dispatch them to their tasks, which include gnawing through woodwork, spilling en masse through windows and ceilings, and devouring a cat. (What could it mean that the sole dog that crosses their path survives shaken but unscathed, while the cat is a goner?)
The original ''Willard,'' you may recall, was a surprise hit that recycled many themes of Alfred Hitchcock's ''Psycho'' while adding a nasty rodential twist. Bruce Davison played the title character, Willard Stiles, who lives with his ailing, domineering mother (Elsa Lanchester), in a 19th-century neo-Gothic mansion with rats in the basement. Ernest Borgnine was the young man's sadistic boss in what used to be the Stiles family business.
In the remake, which opens nationally today, Crispin Glover, an actor who specializes in weird, passive-aggressive milquetoasts, hams it up big time as Willard. Pasty-faced, his coal-black hair parted in the middle and dipping into a saucy Hitlerian forelock, his Willard is a wild-eyed ghoul with a bleeding heart. During the movie the character throws two tantrums, and in each Mr. Glover's voice rises to a shrill babyish cry that goes beyond hysteria into an eerie simian shriek. Except in those moments when he dotingly caresses his favorite rat, the adorably devoted Socrates, the actor doesn't ask you to take Willard's side. His performance is raving goofball caricature.
Like so many other remakes, this one, directed by Glen Morgan, is almost painfully conscious of its antecedents. Those forerunners include not only the original picture and ''Psycho,'' but also Hitchcock's ''Birds.'' Like ''The Birds,'' ''Willard'' teases you before each rodent invasion with squeaking and scuttling sound effects from the unseen hordes. Or it posts one or two ominously stationary rats as advance-guard sentinels before an imminent deluge. The new movie recycles the Michael Jackson hit ''Ben,'' which was heard in the original movie. And Mr. Glover himself groans out a bland reprise over the closing credits.
The worst flaw of ''Willard'' is a clunky tone-deaf screenplay based on Gilbert Ralston's original and updated by the director. Barely a line flies by that doesn't land with a wooden thud. The grinding dialogue sabotages any authentic feeling that the film might have hoped to generate. Jackie Burroughs looks appropriately witchy as Willard's shriveled, black-toenailed mother intent on monitoring her son's bathroom hygiene, but most of her dialogue is lifeless fill-in-the-blanks exposition. R. Lee Ermey as Mr. Martin, the overbearing boss intent on stealing Willard's property, is a one-dimensional blowhard so devoid of Machiavellian evil that when he receives his grisly comeuppance, you want to shrug.
An undernourished subplot in which Willard is befriended by Cathryn (Laura Elena Harring), an attractive office temp, stops the movie dead in its tracks whenever it pops up. The movie reaches its dramatic peak very early with a scene in which Willard packs his rat army into briefcases for a trip to the suburbs and a sneak attack on the tires of his boss's new Mercedes. In that moment, the movie realizes its comic-demonic potential. From there it's all downhill.
''Willard'' 
~
It's probably best that the plot of ''The Hunted'' -- such as it is -- doesn't get in the way of the action sequences, most of which involve Tommy Lee Jones chasing Benicio Del Toro throughout the Pacific Northwest with occasional stops for hand-to-hand combat that make you fear for the actors' safety. Oscar winners deserve better than the man's-man games both Mr. Jones and Mr. Del Toro are subjected to here (and I say that as a fan of action-movie mechanics).
This isn't a movie: it's a police report and the strictly-the-facts terseness of the story makes this more than clear. That tone is first reflected in the use of Johnny Cash's laconic moroseness over the opening title to set the mood, but it also establishes a level of expectation that ''The Hunted'' can't live up to. Instead, we get such a callous product that when the team of F.B.I. agents, headed by Connie Nielsen, joins the chase, they just start firing right into the crowds. The director William Friedkin might as well have painted bull's-eyes on the backs of the actors, since it's obvious that ''The Hunted'' regards them as nothing but expendable.
Such coldness makes it impossible for us to feel anything for the conscience-wracked special-ops military assassin Aaron Hallam (Mr. Del Toro), the hard-target object of the film's manhunt. ''The Hunted'' opens in 1999, as we follow Hallam and his team on a search-and-destroy mission in Kosovo, darting through an elegantly lighted firefight and piles of newly slaughtered victims, to take out the man responsible.
But once he returns home, Hallam can't clear the carnage out of his head. Nor should he be able to, since the luridly sentimental staging includes a child clutching a plush toy while wading through the freshly slaughtered corpses. Hiding out in the woods, Hallam starts picking off hunters like a second-rate action director. He kills them as if he were some renegade member of a wildlife preservation organization.
It's the same kind of extreme prejudice exercised by L. T. Bonham (Mr. Jones), who confesses to working for ''the wildlife fund.'' A talented and able tracker, Bonham is introduced dashing through the snow. His mission is tracking a white wolf, freeing its bloody paw from a snare. Nearly strangling the hunter with the snare as a form of punishment is just gravy.
Bonham is an all-American, mountain-man version of Kwai Chang Caine of ''Kung Fu''; he never uses a gun to disable his prey. Since Bonham is capable of making a knife from a chunk of stone, he probably doesn't need a firearm.
Bonham is asked to locate and bring in Hallam, a trained military assassin so hardwired that he can't turn off the circuitry that's made him so effective. ''He can kill anyone without regret,'' Bonham tells the F.B.I. team leader Abby Durrell (Ms. Nielsen). But Bonham, who trained Hallam, misses the point; Hallam can experience regret. Well, some regret anyway, as he eliminates a cross section of the population of the Pacific Standard Time zone.
The movie is so by-the-book that it lacks the imagination to have Hallam intensify the conflagrations he witnessed in his head, so that the flashbacks take on a growingly mournful weight (though his stress-enfeebled brain probably couldn't support the extravagant resources budgeted to the war sequence shown at the beginning of the picture).
Mr. Del Toro plays Hallam as a man who's erected concrete buttresses around his sensitivity; the closest he comes to cracking his taciturn manner is when he hangs with the daughter of an ex-girlfriend, after coming out of hiding to spend time with her. This is a compact, though slightly undernourished conception that makes a little sense, though it seems to be built around a scene that never takes place -- dramatic material meant to clear up some of his mystery. (Don't wait for this scene to materialize, or else you'll still be sitting in the theater trying to work it out as the ushers are sweeping snack rubble around your feet.)
But Bonham has no trouble finding Hallam anywhere; he could locate him in mainland China with both nostrils behind his back. Mr. Jones, too, is his requisite combination of courtly and ornery -- a mountain man with a leathery, sodden eloquence fashioned by Yeats. Mr. Jones has an almost musical use of pauses, and his bullying charisma is about all he has to fall back on here.
He's played the silent, dedicated killer -- Mr. Del Toro's role -- in ''The Package,'' his first collaboration with the director Andrew Davis, who later handled Mr. Jones in ''The Fugitive.'' There, he gave Mr. Jones a welcome stage for his flinty theatricality; the titanic cornpone of Mr. Jones's famous ''Your fugitive's name is Dr. Richard Kimble'' speech, which the actor is said to have improvised, made his career. Perhaps it did so too effectively; Mr. Jones might as well hang a shingle: ''Chasing fugitives since 1993.''
He and Mr. Del Toro aren't the only ones wasted in this movie. ''The Hunted,'' which opens nationwide today, also makes José Zúñiga disposable. Like most of the cast, he's bait, used to give Hallam something to hit. At least when the actors are being picked off, the movie is being honest.
''The Hunted'' obviously brings to mind the similarly themed ''First Blood,'' a picture whose star, Sylvester Stallone, misunderstood the film's intent. The first Rambo movie obviously was metaphorically centered on chickens coming home to roost; Rambo was a sanctioned demolisher abandoned by his creators. ''The Hunted'' tries to make similar points but doesn't have the attention span to execute them. The stripped-down narrative is almost an apology for the ludicrous story -- but it's just not enough of one.
''The Hunted'' 
~
''Bend It Like Beckham,'' a genial ethnic sports comedy directed by Gurinder Chadha, was a big hit in Britain last year, and Fox Searchlight deserves credit for releasing it in this country with a title that will be, to much of the American audience, utterly incomprehensible. It certainly was to me, until a friend who had recently been in London passed on an explanation that had been given to him in a pub there. Beckham is David Beckham, star of the Manchester United soccer team (and the husband of one of the Spice Girls). The observation ''nobody bends it like Beckham,'' from which the title derives, apparently refers to his ability to curve the ball past the opposing goalkeeper.
The line is reverently uttered by Jess (Parminder Nagra), the younger daughter of a family of middle-class Punjabi immigrants (by way of East Africa) residing in a London suburb. Jess's passion for soccer puts her at odds with her parents who, while not hidebound traditionalists, nonetheless think sports are an improper pastime for an almost-grown teenager with marriage and university to think about.
Her older sister Pinky (Archie Panjabi), whose wedding is approaching, is puzzled that Jess does not share her boy-crazy, shopping-centered approach to life. So when Jess, recruited by her new best friend Jules (Keira Knightley), begins to train with the girls' auxiliary of a local football club, she precipitates a culture clash that ripples outward from her own household and becomes more and more complicated until the big game comes along to sort it all out.
The title, and some of the local dialect, may require a bit of translation, but the film's warm-and-fuzzy amalgam of multiculturalism and feminism will look very familiar indeed. It is stuffed to bursting with affectionate stereotypes and the sticky, somewhat oppressive Gemütlichkeit that is the hallmark, at least on screen, of immigrant families, wherever they come from and wherever they reside.
Ms. Chadha's previous movie, ''What's Cooking?'' made this point fairly explicitly, as it dropped in on the Thanksgiving dinners of a series of families -- Vietnamese, Mexican-American, Jewish and African-American -- living in the same Los Angeles neighborhood and struggling through a series of domestic crises. If ''Bend It Like Beckham'' had focused on Pinky rather than Jess, it might have been ''My Big Fat Sikh Wedding.''
Its cheery inoffensiveness, though, is in some ways disappointing. The South Asian diaspora has inspired some exceptionally clever and cosmopolitan movies from the likes of Hanif Kureishi and Mira Nair, and coming after ''Monsoon Wedding'' and ''My Son the Fanatic,'' ''Bend It Like Beckham'' seems like a step backward. Modern life, for the characters in Ms. Nair's or Mr. Kureishi's films, is a vortex of contradiction and confusion, and their stories unfold with an appropriately swirling, dizzy rhythm. But Ms. Chadha prefers the schematism of the sitcom, in which humor and pathos are carefully and predictably rationed, and people have the capacity to change but never to surprise. The girl-power plot is built, curiously enough, on a scaffolding of mild misogyny. Both Jess and Jules are held back by their shrill, overbearing mothers, who insist on outmoded norms of femininity while the dads, when the chips are down, are patient and supportive.
The cast acquits itself with exemplary good humor. The tiny Ms. Nagra, her mouth set in a pout of determination, has a charming, disarming directness that steers the movie through its easily foreseeable complications. But rather than risk allowing her characters to blossom into full human oddness, Ms. Chadha saddles them with cute mannerisms and binds them together with curlicues of plot, all of which are feverishly tied together by the end.
It is not enough that Jess develop a crush on her coach (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), which makes her Jules's romantic rival. It must turn out that all three are having communication problems with their parents, problems that will be happily solved after the big game, the big wedding and the big montage that conjoins them. If Ms. Chadha's direction were as compulsive as the writing (she collaborated on the screenplay with Guljit Bindra and Paul Mayeda Berges), ''Bend It Like Beckham'' might have been tighter, funnier and, above all, shorter.
''Bend It Like Beckham'' 
~
Recent history offers plenty of examples of civil war, ethnic strife and genocidal violence, but none of them apparently suited the purposes of the folks who made ''Tears of the Sun.'' Instead, the filmmakers chose to invent their own third-world conflict, and rather than follow the time-honored Hollywood tradition of confecting some wholly fictitious San Something-or-other or Whereverstan, they decided to plunge the actual nation of Nigeria into bloody chaos.
As the movie begins, we learn that a military coup against the country's democratically elected government has unleashed horrific mayhem, carried out against Christian civilians by Muslim military men (sometimes identified as rebels, sometimes as the national army, but always outfitted in green khakis and crimson berets). The subsequent scenes -- of rape, of mutilation by machete, of feral child soldiers -- represent a collage of recent real-world African atrocities, evoking wars in places like Rwanda, Liberia and Sudan. Nigeria certainly has its problems, including serious religious and intertribal friction, but it has thus far been spared such carnage.
In the moral scheme of ''Tears of the Sun,'' however, Nigeria itself is, if not entirely irrelevant, at least a temporary convenience. Its disintegration is staged to allow the West -- specifically the United States military -- to atone for its failure to halt those other slaughters. It is often said that politicians and generals are always fighting the last war; in this case, Alex Lasker and Patrick Cirillo, the screenwriters, and Antoine Fuqua, the director, appear to be applying Rambo-style revanchist methods to a Clinton-era debate about humanitarian intervention. The action takes place largely in a dark and murky rain forest, and it unfolds in the metaphorical shadow of Bosnia, Somalia, Kosovo and Vietnam.
Unfortunately, the movie's real setting is a sentimental fantasy world, and its story is a spectacularly incoherent exercise in geopolitical wish fulfillment. Bruce Willis, with the weary, haunted stoicism that has been his trademark since he gave up the smirky frat-boy bonhomie that made him a star, plays A. K. Waters, a Navy Seals lieutenant dispatched into the jungle to evacuate Lena Kendricks (Monica Bellucci), an American doctor who tends the wounded at a remote and vulnerable mission. In no uncertain terms, the doctor, whose khaki blouse appears to be missing its top three buttons, informs her would-be rescuer that she will not leave the refugees behind. She slaps the lieutenant and spits in his face, which helps to spark a crisis of conscience. He tells the rescue helicopter to turn around and, in direct violation of orders, to take the youngest and frailest Nigerians to safety.
The rest of them, along with Dr. Kendricks, Lieutenant Waters and his men, must make their way through the jungle to the Cameroon border with a platoon of murderous soldiers in hot pursuit. Back on the American aircraft carrier, Waters's superior officer (Tom Skerritt) is unable to supply air support, though he turns out to be remarkably forgiving when his subordinate unilaterally declares war, disobeying rules of engagement that permit him to fight only in self-defense. The Americans come upon a village in the middle of a massacre and, with furious professionalism, cleanse it of ethnic cleansers. Then they reconnoiter and declare their willingness to sacrifice their lives to bring their charges to safety, and their resolve is met with tears of gratitude.
The audience's tears are more likely to result from boredom, irritation at Hans Zimmer's wretched fake-world-music score and inadvertent amusement at the thunderously earnest dialogue and Ms. Bellucci's awkward line readings. (She has now made movies in three languages; whether she can act in any of them is an open question.) One of Waters's men (Eamonn Walker), who is African-American, declares, ''These are my people, too,'' and urges his commander to persevere on their new mission. When the mission is almost over, a grateful African woman says: ''We will never forget you. God will never forget you.''
Buried amid the sodden rhetoric and the jungle muck is an honorable intention. The question of how military power should respond to human suffering is both knotty and interesting, but ''Tears'' seems positively spooked by any hint of complexity or by anything that might invite viewers to think too hard about either the characters or the world they (and we) inhabit. Aware that it is using the sufferings of the third world -- once again -- as a backdrop for the moral agony of white people and wishing somehow to subvert this tiresome convention, the film amplifies the selflessness of the mostly white rescuers and the helplessness of the black victims, which only makes matters worse.
Like ''Black Hawk Down,'' it divides Africans into snarling villains and wide-eyed, childlike innocents. The Americans are at once stalwart and compassionate, not so much hardened by the spectacle of human cruelty as softened by it: the battlefield, according to ''Tears of the Sun,'' is not where innocence is lost, but where it is restored. It helps that Waters and his Seals are both underdogs and overlords, a scrappy band of outgunned and outnumbered fighters backed up by fighter planes that can send their enemies off to the next world in a big ball of fire.
''Tears of the Sun,'' which opens today nationwide, would be more engaging, and more moving, if the ambiguities and contradictions of the Seals' changing mission were more fully explored -- if the movie had bothered, as ''Three Kings'' did, to address the battlefield collisions between cynicism and idealism, between the survival instinct and the desire to do good.
All of this aside, the film's bogus, deliberately naïve politics might have been less bothersome if there had at least been some interesting drama. In ''Training Day,'' his previous film, Mr. Fuqua overcame a busy and implausible story by delving into the tangled motives and responses of his characters and by allowing his two lead actors, Denzel Washington and Ethan Hawke, to find a jangly, unpredictable rhythm. Here, whatever internal conflict the characters undergo is resolved before the action starts. Mr. Willis is denied the chance to play a Bogart-like hero evolving from cold cynicism into decency, which is not surprising in a movie that can't begin to tell them apart.
''Tears of the Sun'' 
~
''Nowhere in Africa,'' the leisurely warmhearted chronicle of an upper-class Jewish family that flees Nazi Germany to start life over in Kenya, gives you the agreeable sensation of riding a slow train on an unsettled afternoon through a landscape of the past.
The story of Walter and Jettel Redlich (Merab Ninidze and Juliane KRated PG-13hler), a successful lawyer and his beautiful, elegant wife whose lives are transformed once they relocate to Africa with their young daughter, Regina (Lea Kurka), is too rambling to cohere as a historical epic, and it lacks the romantic heft of a film like ''Out of Africa.'' But despite a shaky narrative focus and dramatic reticence, its journey is consistently absorbing. As its events pass before your eyes, the movie suggests an episodic diorama whose attractive, complicated characters are held discreetly at arm's length.
Adapted by Caroline Link (who directed and wrote the screenplay) from Stefanie Zweig's autobiographical novel, the film has been nominated for an Oscar this year as best foreign language movie. (Ms. Link's film ''Beyond Silence'' competed in the same category in 1997.) It also recently won five Lolas, the German equivalent of the Oscar, including best picture and director.
The Redlichs' odyssey, which involves jarring cultural and economic shocks, domestic strife and the pain of exile, is painted as an almost warm and fuzzy series of learning experiences. Although the problems faced by the exiled family include a disastrous drought and an invasion of locusts (thrown in late in the movie as a dramatic afterthought), the sense of hardship and struggle conveyed by the film remains muted.
''Nowhere in Africa'' is narrated by Regina (Karoline Eckertz plays her as a teenager) but focuses on Jettel, a vain, spoiled snob who eventually emerges as a self-reliant citizen of the world. By the end of the film, she has developed a deep attachment to her new land and extols the value of cultural differences. Ms. KRated PG-13hler's delicate performance captures Jettel's vanity and shallowness without rubbing your face in them, and her metamorphosis into a more solidly grounded woman is subtle but convincing. Because the events are filtered through a young person's memory, the messier adult passions are tinged with a nostalgic glow.
The native Kenyans, especially the saintly Owuor (Sidede Onyulo), who becomes the loyal family cook, fit a little too snugly into a stock National Geographic stereotype of gentle, noble tribespeople living harmoniously with nature and viewing the European arrivals with an affectionate amusement. Kenya was a British colony until 1963, but the movie conveys not the tiniest hint of resistance to European colonialism.
At the start of the film, in 1938, Walter is already living in Kenya, where he manages the farm of a gruff, short-tempered British colonial. When Walter summons his wife and daughter to leave their luxurious life in Breslau, they assume their visit will be a short one and that the Nazis will soon be ousted from power.
Walter instructs his wife to bring a refrigerator, but she fritters away the money on a fancy evening dress. Her frivolity precipitates the first of many domestic clashes that seriously strain the Redlichs' marriage. Jettel initially hates her new life and treats the natives like servants. She embarrasses Owuor by asking him to carry water, a task only the women in his tribe perform. She even looks down on her husband, now that he's a humble farmer no longer practicing law.
Regina eagerly embraces her new circumstances and befriends the native children her own age and learns their language, and the scenes of the girl frolicking with her African peers evoke an idyllic cultural merger.
Although the news arriving from Germany is dire (Jettel's surviving family members are deported), the movie doesn't dwell on the Holocaust. Once the war breaks out, the Redlichs are rounded up by the British and interned with other expatriate Germans in Nairobi, with the men separated from the women. Just when the future is looking the bleakest, Jettel has a convenient fling with a German-speaking British officer who arranges for Walter to manage another farm. But the incident, and Walter's lurking sexual jealousy, are treated cursorily.
Even in Africa, anti-Semitism is palpable. At school, Regina is one of a handful of Jewish children instructed to leave their desks and stand at the side of the classroom while the other students say the Lord's Prayer. The film follows the Redlichs until the end of the war, by which time the couple's attitudes about Germany have reversed. Walter, offered a judicial post in Hesse, is eager to return, while Jettel has no desire to go back.
''Nowhere in Africa,'' which opens today in New York, is a handsome film that lends both the landscape and the colonial life the elegance of a coffee-table picture book. Niki Reiser's African-flavored symphonic music (similar in style to Hans Zimmer's film scores) underlines the visual sweep. This is a movie that basks in the illusion that the past was so much prettier than the present.
NOWHERE IN AFRICA
Directed by Caroline Link; written (in German, with English subtitles) by Ms. Link, based on the novel by Stefanie Zweig; director of photography, Gernot Roll; edited by Patricia Rommel; music by Niki Reiser; produced by Peter Herrmann; released by Zeitgeist Films. Running time: 141 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Juliane Kohler (Jettel Redlich), Merab Ninidze (Walter Redlich), Matthias Habich (Suskind), Sidede Onyulo (Owuor), Karoline Eckertz (older Regina) and Lea Kurka (younger Regina).

~
One of the only graceful moments in ''Cradle 2 the Grave,'' a movie that has the flailing momentum of a defective action toy run amok, comes when the camera pulls back to observe Jet Li leaping from a building and dropping from ledge to ledge in a superhuman exhibition of acrobatic nerve. The scene doesn't last long, but it brings to mind the movie its director Andrzej Bartkowiak might have made had he relaxed his camera and reprogrammed his editorial shredding machine to allow a few more touches of balletic poise.
The poker-faced Hong Kong martial-arts star appears to sense that something's amiss. Throughout the movie, he wears the aloof, vaguely contemptuous expression of a man suffering from indigestion. The human fly sequence demonstrates that Mr. Li can be thrilling to watch when the camera stays still. But the cinematographer-turned-director likes his MTV-style editing so much that in his drive for hyperkinetic overkill he sacrifices coherence to wallow in barely contained chaos.
In teaming Mr. Li (who starred in his first movie, ''Romeo Must Die'') with the rapper DMX (who appeared in both ''Romeo'' and the director's second film, ''Exit Wounds''), Mr. Bartkowiak perpetuates the unwieldy generic hybrid he helped invent in which chest-beating hip-hop attitude fuses with airy kung-fu magic. As the movie whips you around locations that include a subway tunnel, an extreme fighting club, a poshly appointed jail cell and a warehouse, it never stops to catch its breath. That may be good news for those who enjoy the bumpy thrills of a cheap amusement park ride. For everyone else ''Cradle 2 the Grave,'' whose horror-movie title bears no relation to what happens on the screen, suggests the prequel to a video game.
The film, which opens nationally today, follows several warring factions through the streets and underground fleshpots of Los Angeles in pursuit of a cache of priceless black diamonds that have made their way from Taiwan to the United States. In the opening scene, a crew of jewel thieves led by Tony Fait (DMX), bursts into a vault and steals the stones, but he doesn't keep them for long, and they end up in the hands of a crime lord who runs his operation from inside a prison cell where he lives like a sultan.
Fait teams up with Su (Jet Li), a Taiwanese government agent who has tracked the stones from Asia and is pursuing Ling (Mark Dacascos), his former partner turned gangster, who also wants the diamonds. Ling kidnaps Fait's feisty 9-year-old daughter Vanessa (Paige Hurd) and holds her for ransom in exchange for the stones. Because Fait lives for his little girl, the quest becomes a desperate personal crusade. DMX, who can barely act, at least succeeds in conveying a thudding pseudo-sincerity.
Late in the game the film goes haywire when it crudely shoehorns in a new, extraneous plot twist. The priceless stones turn out to contain enough synthetic plutonium to blow up the world. The silliest scene imagines an auction in which a preposterous assortment of international arms dealers frantically bid for the stones. The radioactive angle at least allows one of the villains to be dispatched through a plutonium force-feeding that lights him up and consumes him from inside out.
Here and there, the movie exhibits a raucous fun house humor. In the wittiest action sequence, DMX roars around Los Angeles in an indestructible all-terrain vehicle that carries him out of windows and across chasms in leaps that Evel Knievel could only dream of. At an underground extreme-fighting club, Mr. Li, coerced by Archie (Tom Arnold), a manically cheery small-arms dealer, goes up against a dozen muscle-bound lugs and blithely dispatches them one by one in a flurry of kicks and lunges. The movie ends with an anticlimactic duel staged inside a ring of fire.
Beneath its hip-hop flash, ''Cradle 2 the Grave'' works the kung-fu version of the David-and-Goliath myth, in which all the muscle in the world is no match against the agility, discipline and calculation of a martial-arts master. That may be the most refreshing element of movies starring Jackie Chan and Jet Li. Going against the beefcake aesthetic of popular culture, they insist that size doesn't matter.
''Cradle 2 the Grave'' 
~
''I'm going outside to get some smog.'' This line is delivered off screen, but there is no mistaking the speaker. It is Christopher Walken, who ambles into the frantically overplotted ''Poolhall Junkies,'' as he has in so many other mediocre movies lately, with his game face on and his reedy voice in perfect tune. Wandering out onto a balcony during a fancy soirée, Mr. Walken encounters Mars Callahan, the movie's writer and director as well as its star, and, noticing the younger man's skillet-shaped face and gravity-defying hair, asks, ''Are we related?''
They aren't of course, either off screen or on. Mr. Callahan plays a young pool hustler named Johnny, whose straight-arrow girlfriend Tara (Alison Eastwood) has an eccentric millionaire uncle with a taste for gambling. (That would be Mr. Walken.) But there is nonetheless a clear affinity between the two men, and it is based on Mr. Cahallan's idolatrous regard for the kind of old-school masculine sang-froid that Mr. Walken so effortlessly embodies. This chaotic film, Mr. Callahan's directing debut, works best as a tribute to the gritty character actor mojo represented not only by Mr. Walken but also by Chazz Palminteri and Rod Steiger in one of his last film roles.
The younger men in the cast -- including Michael Rosenbaum, as Johnny's younger brother, Danny, a would-be hustler, and Rick Schroeder as a rival nine-ball master -- know better than to try to compete with the veterans, who attack their meagerly conceived roles with admirable intensity. Mr. Steiger, playing a crusty and benevolent pool hall manager (is there any other kind?), dispenses hard-won street wisdom as if his words were the only thing standing between Johnny and a one-way ticket to Palookaville.
Mr. Palminteri, as is his wont, seethes and sputters in the best B-movie-heavy style. Mr. Walken, graceful and ebullient, does what he did in ''Affair of the Necklace,'' ''Scotland, Pa.,'' ''The Country Bears'' and countless other pictures, which is to make a misbegotten project seem almost cool.
For his part, if Mr. Callahan had not been so determined to prove his own coolness, he might have made a better movie. Like many first-time writer-directors, he has tried to scramble together a half-dozen stories when one, coherently told, would have sufficed.
Johnny, dashing from scene to scene in a state of caffeinated agitation, must settle scores with the backer who sandbagged his budding professional career (Mr. Palminteri), protect Danny and his nerdy pals from the dangers of the hustling life and occasionally remember that he has a girlfriend. The proliferating subplots require many big emotional confrontations, so the movie seems to reach its climax 20 minutes in, and then every 15 minutes or so thereafter. This is fairly exhausting.
But the overreaching messiness of ''Poolhall Junkies'' -- which opens today in the New York metropolitan region, Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego and Chicago -- is almost redeemed by the pool hall sequences, in which Mr. Callahan shows his affection for Mamet-y lowlife idioms and small-time grifter scenarios. As an actor he has more dedication than skill, and as a director he does best when he is not pushing the story but rather sitting back to observe the banter of the players and the intricate, fast-paced physics of the table.
''Poolhall Junkies'' 
~
Can you sue yourself for plagiarism? If so, then ''Old School'' has presented Ivan Reitman with a case. This sloppy, dumb, though occasionally funny comedy is so derivative of ''Animal House'' (and, more specifically, its children) that it's like one of those by-the-numbers imitative movies Homer Simpson is so obsessed with.
Mr. Reitman, best known as a director (''Ghostbusters,'' ''Ghostbusters 2''), also produced ''Animal House,'' which itself parodied the conventions of the genre, though it raised the stakes with a kind of ruthless bad taste that was actually refreshing. ''School,'' on which he served as an executive producer, is like a half-empty glass of Coke that's been sitting out for a couple of days; sure, it looks like cola, but one sip tells you exactly what's missing.
With ''School,'' which opens nationwide today, the director Todd Phillips has made a sort of de facto comedy sequel to his documentary ''Frat House,'' which won the Sundance 1998 Grand Jury Prize. He comes even closer than Mr. Reitman to stealing from himself.
Luke Wilson stars as nice-guy Mitch, whose life is run through a Cuisinart when he comes home early from a conference to find that his girlfriend, Heidi (Juliette Lewis), has been treating herself to a sexual smorgasbord when he's not home. Nursing his wounds, he moves into a house near the Harrison University campus, where he spent his college years. A buddy, a home-electronics mogul named Beanie (Vince Vaughn), persuades Mitch to throw a wild party -- a gig so off the hook that their newly married and newly sober buddy Frank (Will Ferrell) sends all the wheels off his wagon participating.
But the party has further repercussions. The dean of Harrison, Pritchard (Jeremy Piven) -- whom the guys humiliated when they were in school together -- issues an ultimatum. He claims the house where his old tormenters have taken refuge is campus property and gives Mitch and his boys a week to get out. Faster than you can ask, ''How could that happen?'' Beanie comes up with the idea of turning their haven into a fraternity house -- and the invitees are part of an extremely egalitarian program.
It's such a ''nonexclusive community brotherhood,'' as Beanie puts it, that the pledges don't have to be Harrison students, or, in the case of the 80-ish Blue (Patrick Cranshaw), younger than the school.
This extremely flimsy plot turn allows Mitch to stay in his house, and lets the stars party as if it were 1999. The women in the cast -- Ellen Pompeo, Leah Remini and Perrey Reeves -- are mostly delegated to standing around and shaking their heads at the antics. Though Ms. Reeves, as Frank's new bride, Marissa, gets an in-home lesson from an instructor (Andy Dick) that shows she's capable of liberated thinking, too. And Elisha Cuthbert, as drolly delicious as the cream filling in a Twinkie, hijacks the handful of scenes she has.
Mr. Wilson seems as put-upon before his girlfriend betrays his trust as he does afterward. The movie falls mostly on the shoulders of Mr. Vaughn and Mr. Ferrell -- or, rather, they claim it. Mr. Vaughn's coercive cool gives a cubic centimeter of angry polish to Beanie, although his lowlife charm may be nothing new, especially to those who've seen ''Swingers.'' In fact, it's welcome, and his way with a line still works. (He could be one of the hostile frat-boy Visigoths from Mr. Phillips's documentary.) With his aging baby-faced insolence, the married Beanie doesn't have a single good word for relationships or marriage, though he's very careful to keep his kids from overhearing profanity when he brings them along on his constant visits to Mitch's place.
But the movie, such as it is, belongs to Mr. Ferrell. He sacrifices Frank's dignity ounce by ounce, and Frank hasn't much to begin with. Just when you think he's utterly bereft of it, he finds yet another way to lower himself further. As with his work on several seasons of ''Saturday Night Live,'' playing everything from Alex Trebek to the Cheerleader to Neil Diamond, Mr. Ferrell uses his hilarious, anxious zealotry to sell the part. ''It feels so good when it hits your lips,'' Frank happily quivers as he shotguns a beer; he's the essence of the geeky white guy trying to pinpoint his inner hipster.
Frank is most fulfilled when he's hurtling into self-destruction, as is Blue, who gets a chance to finish the off-key version of ''Dust in the Wind'' Frank started. Blue looks nearly old enough to be an original member of Kansas.
There's a great deal of echoing going on in ''Old School.'' Mr. Piven, who played the upstart outsider in the 1994 campus comedy ''PCU,'' has crossed over into playing the stiff martinet. And a well-lubricated wrestling party -- literally so, since the coed opponents square off in a tub full of K-Y jelly -- feels lifted from ''Stripes,'' which Mr. Reitman directed. The nexus between Mr. Reitman and Mr. Phillips is joined when Seann William Scott -- who's both a Reitman (''Evolution'') and Phillips (''Road Trip'') alumnus -- turns up in a scarily real mullet coif as an animal trainer.
''Old School'' is so breezy it could be a late-night talk show, especially when Craig Kilborn, of ''The Late Late Show,'' sidles into camera range as a particularly loathsome competitor to Mitch. Mr. Kilborn takes his Kilby persona to new highs -- or is it lows?
And the imperturbable Snoop Dogg drops science in a cameo as himself. Aided by Warren G and Archbishop Don Magic Juan of ''American Pimp,'' he looks as cooled out as he did when he accepted the High Times's Man of the Year award.
By the time James Carville, as himself, joins the fun, you realize an era has passed. It used to be a coup to get outrageous, unexpected cameos -- now, they're expected. A corrupting smugness has set in to these comedies. What would really be old school is for ''Old School'' to surprise us.
''Old School'' 
~
Kevin Spacey now seems determined to make the move from jaunty, caustic leading man to martyr: he sacrificed himself for the betterment of mankind, though not necessarily the moviegoing public, in ''K-Pax'' and ''Pay It Forward.'' And now, in the would-be thriller ''The Life of David Gale,'' he plays a death-penalty opponent facing execution for murder. The film's ironies must have made him delirious.
It's understandable that Mr. Spacey doesn't want to be typecast, and his ability to curdle the sentimentality in the sappiest material has almost saved sections of those previous movies. But this is an enterprise in which everyone is out to make History, instead of a movie.
As the title character in ''David Gale,'' Mr. Spacey, a downtrodden philosophy professor and activist who's become an alcoholic criminal, evinces a weariness in his voice. The words float out of his mouth as if he were too tired to muster the strength for a single inflection, and this gives the picture the merest trace of believability. But that's before the crude, bullying narrative begins peppering the audience with kidney punches: ''David Gale'' may be the first liberal-leaning movie that could be brought up on assault charges since its director, Alan Parker, made ''Midnight Express.'' Mr. Parker seems to think audiences are incapable of coming to their own conclusions, so he relieves them of that burden by doing it for them.
The reporter Bitsey Bloom (Kate Winslet), from a newsmagazine called News (apparently, there were no tie-ins available from Time, Newsweek or Scholastic Scope), has been granted three final interview sessions with Gale while he sits on death row in Texas. He is convicted of having raped and killed Constance (Laura Linney), his activist associate. Ms. Winslet is not asked to act -- she simply assumes poses, the better to be shaken out of them. Tough and bitter, Bitsey is eventually won over by her subject. As she hears more about the events that led to Gale's sentencing, her acrid demeanor dissolves like sugar in summer rain.
Her equally intrepid intern, the puppyish Zack (Gabriel Mann), already believes something is fishy -- he points out that Gale's lawyer is incompetent and other obvious facts. Neither of them, however, appears to be in a position to judge anyone's competence, given that this intrepid pair are incapable of even returning a faulty rental car. The picture begins with Bitsey running with a crucial videotape in hand after the rented Ford overheats. The story then unfolds in flashback. As the reporters dig further, it looks as if Gale was more than railroaded: he was given a first-class seat on the bullet train.
Mr. Spacey's stylized brooding, with its swoops and dives, makes him an apt choice for a man riddled by mood swings. He works hard to make Gale register as a character -- no small feat, given the facile script and the relentless sourness of the filmmaking. Yet there's nothing facile about parts of his performance. (That is, until the ludicrously predictable, tear-jerking climax, a cheat that implies that Gale is all talk: he comes off as the Keyser Soze of liberals.)
Mr. Spacey may have taken his lead from his idol, Jack Lemmon, who made politics part of his role in the anti-nuclear-power film ''The China Syndrome.'' Like ''David Gale,'' ''Syndrome'' benefited from a flow of events that made it wholly appropriate and timely. For ''Syndrome,'' it was the Three Mile Island accident. But Lemmon gave one of his most memorable performances in ''Syndrome,'' a terse, decisive plum -- one of his rare latter-day dramatic roles in which he wasn't stewing in his own pained sweat.
Mr. Parker, on the other hand, lets loose the floodgates for ''David Gale,'' which opens nationwide today. The man who scaled back with ''The Commitments'' and brought flesh and blood to ''Evita'' has reverted to the bludgeoning technique that made many of his early movies unforgettable -- in the manner of a carjacking.
Mr. Parker is apparently out to make us look back fondly on the halcyon days of filmed brutality as in ''Midnight Express'' -- the first of his films to beat down audiences with a crowbar -- and in the insulting ''Mississippi Burning.'' ''Burning'' single-handedly took the civil rights movement away from Rosa Parks, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and other courageous civilians who risked their lives, and credited social change to the F.B.I.
Mr. Parker has a gift for finding screenwriters who can express views that aren't far from his own. In ''David Gale,'' it's Charles Randolph, who gives Bitsey and Zack exchanges like, ''Never trust a state with more churches than Starbucks.'' The movie's contempt is thicker than the accents; the Texas governor is said to be ''in touch with his inner frat boy'' -- a funny and not-too-subtle jab at the state that kept piling up capital punishment records during George W. Bush's years as governor. (Any state that gave the world Gov. Ann W. Richards and Lyndon B. Johnson is a little more complicated than ''David Gale'' gives it credit for.)
Unfortunately, the contrivances pile up, too -- there's a revelation of cancer and other red herrings that will leave the audience stunned, and not by the film's cleverness. There hasn't been a better time for a movie that asks Americans to think about life-and-death questions than after a weekend in which hundreds of thousands of protesters marched to make their feelings known about a possible war with Iraq. There's a hunger for another side of a national dialogue; in Gale's face-to-face debate with the governor, he's such a savvy, articulate customer that those who agree with the picture's politics will thrill to Mr. Spacey's elegant volubility.
But Gale undercuts his own argument because of ego -- a weakness that underlies this movie, which doesn't build its case as meticulously as ''The China Syndrome.'' ''David Gale'' tries to show it has its heart in the right place, but it's such a crude undertaking that it doesn't actually seem to have a heart at all.
''The Life of David Gale'' 
~
In real life, young police officers encounter all kinds of risks, but in the movies the greatest danger they face tends to come from older police officers, in particular those who serve as their partners, protectors and mentors. This is especially true if the veterans are part of an elite, special unit, elite and special being cop-movie synonyms for corrupt and vicious. Think, for example, of poor Ethan Hawke in ''Training Day,'' being menaced by the murderous caprices of Denzel Washington's garrulous, sociopathic senior detective.
If you have trouble remembering Mr. Hawke in that movie, it may be because the actors playing young police officers face grave risks of their own: they are in perpetual danger of being overshadowed by their older co-stars. Villainy, after all, offers better opportunities for an attention-grabbing performance than virtue. And in ''Dark Blue,'' Ron Shelton's melodrama of malfeasance in the Los Angeles Police Department (adapted from a James Ellroy story by David Ayer, who also wrote ''Training Day''), it is hard to know whom to feel sorrier for:
Bobby Keough, the junior detective, or Scott Speedman, the actor who plays him.
Keough is a dewy, pretty innocent ensnared in a web of tribalism and dishonesty. He is, through family connections, part of a seamy pocket of arrogant lawlessness within the L.A.P.D. -- a cabal of racist, brutal cops led by his uncle (an especially sly and louche Brendan Gleeson), who cloak their greedy vigilantism in the garb of law-and-order righteousness. Practicing an ugly, retail variant on the crime-prevention tactics explored in Steven Spielberg's ''Minority Report,'' they dispense beatings and executions without due process, reasoning that their victims were bad guys anyway and society is better off without them.
Keough's crisis of conscience is the movie's most obvious and least interesting narrative arc. The real center of the dramatic action is his partner, a strutting, shaggy-haired cowboy named Eldon Perry, played by Kurt Russell with the heat, precision and dexterity of a Duane Allman guitar solo.
Mr. Russell, as quick and resourceful as they come, has been throwing himself away for so long in barely watchable movies like ''Captain Ron'' and ''3,000 Miles to Graceland'' that his performance here comes as something of a revelation. Perry is nothing if not complicated, and for the character to work, we, like Keough, must be seduced and repelled by him in equal measure. Perry's soul has been corroded beyond repair -- by bigotry, by alcohol, by the poisonous traditions of the department subculture -- but he is kept going by a sense of honor that is only partly self-delusion.
Mr. Russell gives full rein to Perry's bold, profane swagger. Like Mr. Washington in ''Training Day,'' he savors the testosterone rush of street-level authority, but at the same time he shows that, underneath the bravado, the character is weary, sad and afraid. His marriage (to a Department of Corrections employee played, in too few scenes, by Lolita Davidovich) is falling apart, and his heroic, macho image of himself is crumbling in the face of unpalatable realities. Bold as it is, Mr. Russell's performance is also full of smart, revealing grace notes: look at the way Perry, after languishing in a motel room, shaggy and drunk, walks out into the sunlight clean-shaven and determined, in an alcoholic's last stab at maintaining the illusion of self-control; and notice the look of grim fatigue on his face as he prepares to walk into the film's climactic ambush.
Unfortunately, the rest of the movie, which opens today nationwide, does not live up to Mr. Russell's performance. The other characters are thinly drawn -- traced, really, from faded television-series blueprints -- and the baroque busyness of the plot is a poor substitute for complexity. Mr. Shelton has a loose, rambling style and tends to be more interested in character than story. But the script is overloaded with exposition and incident, and for long passages it shows all the verve and imagination of an episode of ''Hunter.''
Mr. Speedman, his hair in a grown-out surfer pompadour just like Mr. Russell's, looks as if he had gotten lost on his way to an episode of ''Felicity'' (in which he used to appear) and stumbled onto the set of ''The Shield.''
He is also burdened with an absurd romantic subplot conveniently arranged to tie up loose narrative strands. Keough is having an affair with Sgt. Beth Williamson (Michael Michele), who just happens to be the assistant and former lover of Arthur Holland (Ving Rhames), an African-American deputy police chief determined to bring down Perry and his crew.
Racial tension is a subject Mr. Shelton has addressed before, in sports comedies like ''White Men Can't Jump'' and ''The Great White Hype,'' directed by Reginald Hudlin from Mr. Shelton's screenplay. In ''Dark Blue,'' which takes place in 1992 as Los Angeles awaits the verdict in the Rodney King beating trial, racial hostility is as palpable as smog. The filmmakers, no doubt aided by Mr. Ellroy's knack for turning pulp narrative into a form of social history, produce a pungent sampling of multicultural criminality, in which cynicism is as basic a survival skill as violence.
The impending riot opens a dramatic wedge: the characters fear what might happen, while the audience knows the outcome. The threat of urban anarchy raises the level of suspense, and although its outbreak provides some of the film's most vivid and troubling scenes, the explosion produces a dramatic stalemate. The systemic rottenness that Perry and his gang represent and the simmering fury of the city's abused black residents should illuminate each other, but instead they cancel each other out.
Perry's big finale -- a thankless, speechifying scene that Mr. Russell brings off with remarkable aplomb -- feels curiously irrelevant, given what's happening in other parts of the city.
''Dark Blue''
~
''Gods and Generals,'' a lumpy three-and-a-half-hour glob of Civil War history, occupies a narrow but self-important cinematic genre that might be called American History Pageant. As it follows more than two years of Civil War strife, from early 1861 through 1863, the film sustains a tone of grave, high-minded seriousness.
This is history with a capital H; therefore no humor or spontaneous passion is permitted to leak through the solemnity. Panoramic, meticulously reconstructed battle sequences are interspersed with long-winded reflections by legendary historic figures musing in ministerial tones. Speeches that cry out for abbreviation are dragged out to their final, redundant flourishes. The only villains in a movie that portrays the military brass on both sides as staunchly heroic are three Confederate deserters.
Nobility is the official sentiment that washes through ''Gods and Generals'' like a purifying bleach. When wounded soldiers die, they pass into the great beyond with little fuss, their eyes turned expectantly toward heaven. The survivors grieve in discreetly choked sobs, comforted by the certainty that their departed loved ones are reclining with the angels. War may be hell (and in fairness to the movie, its battle scenes are moderately gory), but ''Gods and Generals'' makes going to war feel like going to church.
The movie is the prequel to ''Gettysburg,'' an even longer 1993 film (and subsequent television mini-series) overseen, as is this one, by Ted Turner; he also makes cameo appearances in both. Here he joins Confederate soldiers in a rollicking sing-along of ''Bonnie Blue Flag.''
Both films were written and directed by Ronald F. Maxwell and adapted from a sequence of Civil War books begun by Michael Shaara, whose 1974 novel, ''The Killer Angels,'' became the movie ''Gettsysburg.'' Since Shaara's death in 1988, his work has been carried on by his son, Jeff, whose novel ''Gods and Generals'' was published seven years ago.
Although the two movies share the same epic ambitions and majestic visual sweep, something has gone terribly wrong in the decade separating them. ''Gods and Generals'' carries the earlier film's tendencies toward ponderous sermonizing to ludicrous extremes. At the same time, it lacks its forerunner's grasp of the flow of history. Events are confusingly piled onto one other, often with too many distracting details. (For no apparent reason other than to flaunt its scholarship, the movie lists the names of actual brigades as they go into battle.) And just when it seems about to gel as a narrative, the film has a way of taking a tangent to rope in subsidiary characters, who subsequently disappear. (Maybe, in the inevitable extended mini-series format, we will see more of them.)
The film's biggest structural problem is its unwieldy time frame. Where ''Gettysburg'' focused on a battle that lasted three and a half days, ''Gods and Generals'' encompasses three major Civil War conflicts, all in Virginia: the first battle of Bull Run, the battle of Fredericksburg (in which successive waves of Union troops were beaten back by entrenched Confederate forces) and the battle of Chancellorsville.
It was at Chancellorsville that the victorious Confederate general Stonewall Jackson (Stephen Lang) was accidentally wounded by his own troops. He died of pneumonia eight days later. Typical of the movie's lack of editorial discretion is the way it lingers by his deathbed for an excruciatingly dull 20-minute farewell.
Robert Duvall's soft-spoken portrayal of the Confederate commander Robert E. Lee gets special star billing, but it is Mr. Lang's fiery-eyed Jackson who dominates the film. Even though ''Gods and Generals'' worships Jackson's heavy-bearded gravitas, he comes across as a bully and a religious fanatic prating endlessly about ''God's will.'' The nadir of the film is a grotesquely sentimental episode in which Jackson, who has just learned of a little girl's death from scarlet fever, breaks down weeping in front of his soldiers. An outpouring intended to humanize the character comes across as a grandstanding gesture of imperial self-pity.
The biblical cadences of Jackson's and Lee's speeches are augmented by a turgid, Americana-flavored score (by John Frizzell and Randy Edelman) that plays almost continuously throughout the movie. The doughy amalgam of oratory and quasi-symphonic bombast that makes heavy-handed use of a chorus produces the sinking sense of being trapped at an endless memorial service.
The religiosity of the rhetoric may be authentic, but its relentlessness portrays the Confederate cause as a holy war. At the same time, the movie's undiluted adulation of Lee's and Jackson's machismo appears to put it on the Confederate side. ''Gods and Generals'' goes out of its way to follow the example of ''Gone With the Wind'' in sanitizing the South's treatment of African-Americans. Its one-sided vision shows freed and about-to-be-freed slaves cleaving to their benign white masters and loyally serving the Confederate army.
About an hour into the film, ''Gods and Generals'' belatedly tries to balance the moral ledger by bringing back Lt. Col. Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain (Jeff Daniels), the virtuous Union leader who was the shining sage of ''Gettysburg.'' A Maine college professor who gave up a promising academic career to enlist in the army, Chamberlain delivers the movie's sharpest diatribe against slavery in a speech in which he calls its abolition a cause worth dying for. But Mr. Daniels, who has gained a double chin since ''Gettysburg,'' has shed his luminosity. Next to his Confederate foes, he comes across as a bloated, ineffectual wimp.
It is only when ''Gods and Generals'' holds its tongue that its virtues begin to emerge. Those strengths are primarily technical and scholarly and should delight Civil War buffs. The movie, which opens today nationwide, was beautifully photographed in various locations around Virginia, Maryland and West Virginia, and in certain scenes you can almost taste the nip of frost in the air. The populous, precisely choreographed battle scenes, which use 7,500 Civil War re-enactors, transport you directly to the front lines of a conflict whose mid-19th-century rules of combat bring an antiquated code of manners to a barbaric enterprise. Back in the era when soldiers faced each other eye to eye, you are reminded, war could still be viewed as a gloriously heroic blood sport.
''Gods and Generals'' 
~
Directed by Steve Trenbirth
G, 72 minutes
''The Jungle Book,'' released in 1967, was the last of the animated features bearing his name to which Walt Disney made a substantial contribution. (He died in 1966, while the film was still in production.) It's a safe bet that Disney would have shuddered to see his name attached to ''The Jungle Book 2,'' a sequel created by the Disney studio's Australian-based direct-to-video arm, DisneyToon Studios.
The new film does little but recycle the memorable moments of the first -- including the song ''Bare Necessities,'' now a staple of Disney anthologies -- while rendering them in a cheap, thin style of animation far closer to Saturday morning television than to the classic Disney features.
The project seems ghoulish on several levels. Apart from the appropriation of the Disney name, this new ''Jungle Book'' resurrects, by means of imitation, several voice actors who participated in the original film but have since died.
John Goodman does a fine job of channeling Phil Harris, the bandleader and radio personality who provided the voice of Baloo, the fun-loving hipster bear, in the original. Tony Jay contributes an impression of George Sanders, the late, great master of Continental sarcasm, who voiced the villainous tiger Shere Khan in the 1967 film, while Jim Cummings recycles the distinctive Southern purr of Sterling Holloway as the boa constrictor Kaa. (Mr. Cummings already subbed for Holloway as the narrator of ''The Tigger Movie,'' the latest in Disney's series of ''Winnie the Pooh'' adaptations.) The character of the monkey ruler, King Louis, is missing from the sequel; this might have something to do with a lawsuit for unpaid DVD royalties that was once filed by the widow of Louis Prima, who created the character in the 1967 film.
For its plot line, however, ''The Jungle Book 2,'' which opens today nationwide, depends less on the original (and even less on the Rudyard Kipling storybook that is its distant origin) than on Mark Twain's ''Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.'' The new film finds the jungle boy Mowgli (now with the voice of Haley Joel Osment) living in bourgeois comfort in a village near the jungle's edge. Starving for adventure, he runs off with the big, lovable and blatantly irresponsible Baloo, filling in for Twain's runaway slave, Jim.
The task of reclaiming Mowgli for civilization is left to a new character, a pretty village girl named Shanti (Mae Whitman). Given how drab and unenticing this particular jungle is, the film's only surprise is that it takes her a whole 70 minutes to do it.   DAVE KEHR

~
Evangeline Dandridge (Gabrielle Union), the formidable title character of Gary Hardwick's romantic comedy ''Deliver Us From Eva,'' is a self-righteous, sharp-tongued know-it-all who works as a health inspector in Los Angeles. Eva, as she is called, relishes the opportunity to ambush a restaurant and reduce its manager to jelly by smugly ticking off health-code violations on her checklist.
The leader of her church choir, this superwoman still has the energy at the end of the day to micromanage the lives of her three younger sisters, whom she brought up after their parents died in a car accident. And oh yes, Eva is also a knockout, smart as a whip and charming in the rare moments when she lowers her guard.
But when Eva is displeased, she does more than administer a tongue-lashing. Her complaints are prologues to lofty lectures, laced with fancy words and statistics and delivered in a tone of scathing contempt. The recipients of her most cutting speeches are inevitably men, whom she regards with a mixture of deep suspicion and veiled desire.
''Deliver Us From Eva,'' in which three men conspire to give this haughty diva her comeuppance, might be described as an amiable African-American variation of ''The Taming of the Shrew,'' translated into the concise, salty banter of a modern sitcom. Graced with easygoing ensemble performances, it affectionately spoofs sexual combat among young, middle-class African-Americans in Southern California, where the mating game seems to be the only thing that matters.
The movie, whose subsidiary characters remain vague, is carried by the sharp comic performance of Ms. Union, a quick-witted actress who succeeds in imbuing Eva's priggishness and arrogance with a certain nobility. There's no doubting that Eva is a handful. Although her sisters look up to her as an all-knowing surrogate mother, her influence is driving the men in their lives crazy.
Kareenah (Essence Atkins) has postponed having the children her husband, Tim (Mel Jackson), desperately wants because Eva advised her to wait at least three years to make sure her marriage was solid. Bethany (Robinne Lee) refuses to live with her boyfriend, Mike (Duane Martin), a policeman, because Eva disapproves of unmarried cohabitation. Eva is also continually butting into the relationship of her youngest sister, Jacqui (Meagan Good), and her husband, Darrell (Dartanyan Edmonds), a postal carrier.
The beleaguered men are so frustrated that they band together to enlist the services of a notorious ladies' man, Ray Adams (the rapper LL Cool J), who drives a meat truck. For $5,000 and expenses Ray, who fancies himself irresistible, agrees to distract Eva by putting the moves on her and making her fall in love with him, then dumping her.
The movie's offbeat variation on standard Hollywood lovers pits a gorgeous, supremely articulate viper against a sleepy-eyed dreamboat with a limited vocabulary. Although not the most plausible coupling, it conjures a simmering romantic chemistry in which Ms. Union, lean, sleek and feline, is all polished angles, to the rapper's sultry-eyed teddy bear. A heavy physical presence with more bulging muscles than Popeye, LL Cool J spills across the screen like a gentle giant whose frame is almost too large for the camera to take in.
Ray, who has few pretensions, picks Eva up for their first date in his delivery truck. As she dispenses her vinegary barbs, he counters with an ingenuous sincerity. So impregnable is his sexual confidence that he appears emotionally bulletproof. Even after Eva has insulted him, he remains unfazed. The sex is smoldering without being explosive, and in their first love scene, they exchange little more than baby kisses. Late in the movie, when Ray begs for her forgiveness, he pleads in the forlorn and guileless voice of an overgrown child.
In the romantic ethos of ''Deliver Us From Eva,'' which opens today nationwide, women call the shots. Eva is only the most outspoken of four sisters who have no qualms about speaking their minds. The Dandridge family bond proves far more solid than the shaky male alliance that conspires against Eva. When the women need to let off steam, they adjourn to the beauty parlor, where the talk is blunt and the laughter raucous.
If ''Deliver Us From Eva'' is amusing, it is not uproarious. Like all well-made sitcoms, it offers creaturely reassurance. At the end of the day, it supposes, what more could anyone want than the comforts of home, family and a warm body to hug?
''Deliver Us From Eva'' 
~
It's more dangerous to be a friend or relative of Jackie Chan in the star's movies than it is to play the third yeoman on a ''Star Trek'' episode. Think about the growing pile of pals and relations, from the original ''Drunken Master'' to last fall's ''Tuxedo,'' where the most telling casualty may have been Mr. Chan's reputation. But it's resuscitated in the rousing, cheerful sequel to ''Shanghai Noon,'' ''Shanghai Knights.'' In the new film, the expendable relative is Mr. Chan's father, killed while guarding the royal seal in the Forbidden City.
And when the former Imperial Guard Chon Wang (Mr. Chan) gets the bad news, he quits his job as a small-town sheriff in the Old West and heads off to find the murderer. Though it's personal, this time it's also mechanical.
Chon sets off so quickly you don't get a chance to ask how he found Grecian Formula in 1887. He heads to New York to find his fast-talking friend and helpless action sidekick from ''Shanghai Noon,'' Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson). Currently down on his luck, Roy joins Chon as they make for Victorian England, where Chon has learned his papa's assassin is hiding. He also learns his sister, Lin (Fann Wong), is on the bloody trail, too. In genre terms, this time it's impersonal. Chon, Roy and Lin all end up in the home, and beneath the contempt, of the slim-lipped, ambitious British heel Rathbone (Aidan Gillen), who shows only the merest flashes of the pleasure he gets to exhibit on the television series ''Queer as Folk.''
Mr. Chan has finally smoothed out the formula for Western mainstream success. Get a mouthy American archetype bordering on stereotypical -- like Chris Tucker in the ''Rush Hour'' pictures and Mr. Wilson here -- to provide the patter, while the star leapfrogs through martial-comedy stunts that, this time around, have a physical comic piquancy. Mr. Chan does his emoting during the punchouts -- his takes of fear and pain register more here than ever before. (Don't forget, this Beijing Opera-trained control freak has tailored his own persona since ''Master,'' over 50 movie appearances ago, and is executive producer of ''Knights.'')
Mr. Chan's debt to silent-movie comedy is acknowledged in one sequence evoking Mack Sennett's Keystone Kops, in which he disarms Manhattan policemen, and in another saluting Harold Lloyd with a bit of derring-do in London involving the hands on the face of Big Ben.
A love of movies is discernible in the director David Dobkin's staging, and the bluntly gorgeous cinematography by Adrian Biddle. An opening shot of Beijing's Forbidden City in the twilight of Manchu rule is so starkly, unbelievably pretty, it seems to be set in a snow globe. The billowing blizzard of fake snow -- it's like confetti at a New Year's celebration -- only adds to the handsome illusion.
Mr. Wilson pockets his share of the movie, too. Keeping with the screenwriters Alfred Gough and Miles Millar's conception -- that late Victorian London is the bubbling-with-opportunity equivalent of the swinging city of Richard Lester's 1960's movies -- Roy turns his tall-in-the-saddle squint from ''Shanghai Noon'' toward taking advantage of the fun. It's his bawdy description of London that probably got ''Shanghai Knights'' its PG-13 rating; censors, start your engines.
''Knights,'' which opens nationwide today, is certainly a more fitting place for Mr. Wilson than ''I Spy,'' in which he starred with Eddie Murphy. Mr. Wilson gets to steal a part of the movie that Mr. Chan is smart enough not to want: the banter, which he turns into a monologue. Mr. Wilson's slacker megalomania is at its unabashed height as he drawls a come-on and dismisses any conversation that he can't dominate. Roy's love of his own verbal audacity almost works as a performance. Dodging the fights while sporting his wide-brimmed Stetson, he's become the stoner's version of James Garner.
After Chon helps Lin through a high-wire escape from a burning building -- literally, it's a lighter-than-air, wire-assisted flight like something out of thousands of kung-fu films -- Mr. Wilson's dry observation is a high point of the film. His turn is so anachronistic that it's surprising he doesn't answer a cellphone in the middle of his slow-mo rapping; he's Snoop Blondie-Blond.
The screenwriters treat the 1880's as if it were the world of the old television show ''The Wild, Wild West.'' ''Shanghai Knights'' is a landscape where Roy calls stuff ''cool,'' there's next to no racism, the warm-hearted London cop Artie Doyle (Thomas Fisher), the duo's friend, is inspired to become a mystery author, a street urchin named Charlie (Aaron Johnson) gobbles up all of Chon's balletic moves and, in the action climax, a Gatling gun doesn't jam.
This time the silliness is as contagious as it is outrageous. (It's similar to the pop-culture stew Mr. Millar and Mr. Gough dish up in their visit-to-a-small-planet television reconfiguration of Superman, ''Smallville.'')
There's not a scene in ''Knights'' that doesn't go a beat too long, but such longueurs could be attributed to waiting out the laughs the filmmakers are confident will come. The movie-fever charm of a fight scene that takes its lead from ''Singin' in the Rain'' reminds us that Jackie Chan is the action-movie version of Donald O'Connor, a flexible imp whose acrobatic aplomb suggests physical wit. He's become gallant enough not to upstage his sister in the combat scenes; he nearly killed himself trying to outdo Michelle Yeoh in ''Supercop.'' (Then again, look at the outtakes; he almost always nearly kills himself.)
It's true that as Mr. Chan makes more American movies -- and gets older -- we will never again see the kind of fistfight choreography that the star would devote four months to shoot. In Fredric Dannen's book, ''Hong Kong Babylon,'' Mr. Chan joked that American film crews would sue if he devoted that much time to his combat ballets.
If Mr. Chan ever makes another movie like ''The Tuxedo,'' it's American audiences that will see him in court. With ''Shanghai Knights,'' he has come through with one of his best. This time, it's personable.
''Shanghai Knights'' 
~
I'll say this much for ''How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days'': it is a little better than the two other recent high-concept romantic comedies based in New York, ''Two Weeks Notice'' and ''Maid in Manhattan.'' This is largely because the writing is a bit sharper and the two stars, Matthew McConaughey and Kate Hudson, have a prickly, hot-and-cold chemistry. The screenplay is by Kristen Buckley and Brian Regan, who wrote ''102 Dalmations,'' and Burr Steers, who wrote and directed ''Igby Goes Down.''
An expert in the higher mathematics of the movie industry might come up with an equation to show how the treacly gruesomeness of ''Dalmations'' divided by the scabrous brilliance of ''Igby'' might yield the intermittently beguiling averageness of this movie, which opens nationwide today. The answer might lie in the smooth, ingratiating style of the director, Donald Petrie, who also did ''Miss Congeniality'' and ''Mystic Pizza.''
Ms. Hudson, who has been charming but not terribly exciting in movies like ''Almost Famous'' and ''Dr. T and the Women,'' at last shows that she has inherited something more than blond good looks from her mother, Goldie Hawn. She has a similar knack for screwball sexiness, often ricocheting from bombshell to dingbat and back again in the course of a single scene. For his part, Mr. McConaughey steps into the role of comic foil with gentlemanly aplomb. You don't believe this scrubbed and gleaming pair are really the love-struck and ambitious young Manhattan professionals they are pretending to be, but for the most part the pretending is reasonably enjoyable to watch.
Ms. Hudson plays Andie Anderson, who writes how-to columns for a glossy women's magazine called Composure. A journalism school graduate, Andie yearns to write about more substantial topics than shoes, orgasms and yoga, but her editor (a deliciously feline Bebe Neuwirth, who should have been given more to do) is no more interested in seriousness than the filmmakers themselves. Observing the romantic woes of a hapless co-worker (Kathryn Hahn), Andie decides to write the article that gives the movie its title. She will snare an eligible man and then, through a combination of clinginess, neediness and borderline psychotic behavior, drive him away.
Unknown to Andie, her designated mark, Ben Barry (Mr. McConaughey), has his own professional reasons for hanging around. His advertising firm is going after a big jewelry account, which he and his buddies want to wrest from a rival all-female creative team. To prove he can sell diamonds to women, Ben, an updated swinging bachelor from a Rock Hudson-Doris Day picture, must sell himself to one. His boss (Robert Klein, who has even less screen time than Ms. Neuwirth) gives Ben 10 days to make an eligible woman fall in love with him. So he and Andie, at clever cross-purposes, begin a cynical relationship, which almost too late turns into the real thing.
After this elaborate and promising setup, ''How to Lose a Guy'' manages to come up with a number of not terribly inspired but nonetheless well-executed funny bits. After her initial seduction of Ben, Andie turns into a needy, weepy, manipulative monster, sending him off to buy her a soda in the final seconds of a close Knicks game, sniffling over the rack of lamb Ben has prepared for their second date and giving his penis an embarrassing nickname. Ms. Hudson mugs and minces her way through these scenes with delighted shamelessness, and Mr. McConaughey makes a fine show of swallowing his exasperation.
If the movie provides no new insight into the contrasting behavior of men and women or the perils of postmodern urban dating, falling well shy of the not-too-high standard set by ''Sex and the City'' on both fronts, it does have its tart, fizzy moments. It also has the usual montages set to mediocre pop songs, and its soft, lovey-dovey passages feel particularly lazy. Of course, you know where it will all end, and the last 20 minutes, during which all of the picture's comic effervescence dissipates, might have been compressed or dispensed with altogether. After Andie and Ben perform a tuneless, furious duet of ''You're So Vain'' in front of a stunned and silent Marvin Hamlisch, there is a long, dreary stretch leading up to the obligatory boy-chases-girl-to-the-airport-as-she's-about-to-leave-town-forever sequence.
The chase gets as far as the middle of the Manhattan Bridge, and it is always nice when a movie set in New York appears to have actually been filmed here, rather than somewhere in Canada. The neighborhood locations and tourist sights are well chosen, though the light in the earnest, kissy scenes appears to have been imported from Hawaii. Even the most golden-hued New Yorkers never quite achieve the honey-dipped dewiness that Mr. McConaughey and Ms. Hudson occasionally display.
But they're movie stars, of course, and this is a romantic fantasy of New York in which the advertising and magazine industries are untouched by any hint of recession, the Knicks are in the N.B.A. finals and the Cinema Village, in reality one of the last holdouts of international avant-gardist film culture, is showing a chick flick marathon. This bit, which sets up an amusing fistfight between Ben and a sentimental giant, is a little piece of auto-homage on the part of the filmmakers. The marquee advertises ''Sleepless in Seattle'' (whose executive producer, Lynda Obst, also produced this movie), and Mr. Petrie's own ''Mystic Pizza.''
''How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days'' 
~
What is an actor with the crunching gravitas of Laurence Fishburne doing in a flimsy motorcycle movie like ''Biker Boyz''? Glowering behind a Fu Manchu mustache, he plays Smoke, the ''King of Cali'' and leader of the Black Knights, an underground California motorcycle club made up of white-collar African-Americans who shed their business attire off-hours to put on leather and go racing.
Although Smoke is near the end of his reign as the racing subculture's top dog, Mr. Fishburne's mopey performance gives the character an extra layer of weary, sodden lassitude. In contrast to the other bodies in a movie that serves up its younger characters as a gleaming parade of tattooed beef- and cheesecake, Mr. Fishburne appears bloated, paunchy and enervated, and bearing a chip on his shoulder.
''Biker Boyz,'' directed by Reggie Rock Bythewood, imagines itself a leaner, hipper, African-American-slanted answer to ''The Fast and the Furious,'' but it has little of the visceral energy of its forerunner and none of its adolescent sense of grandeur. The performers in the movie's rock-meets-soul-meets-hip-hop soundtrack range from James Brown to Metallica to Ja Rule, but the music comes across as an unfocused mélange haphazardly coordinated with the action. Most crucially, neither Mr. Fishburne nor his co-star Derek Luke, who showed such enormous promise in ''Antwone Fisher,'' has charisma to match the campy macho glamour of Vin Diesel.
The movie, which opens today nationwide, should at least have offered some cheap roller-coaster thrills. But the camera work is much too nervous to settle into the swooping groove that might convey the thrill of rocketing low to the ground at speeds of more than 150 miles an hour. And many of the scenes feel overcrowded, as too many people meander into view with no particular place to go. Even when the movie shows a group of bikers executing choreographed movements, their stunts aren't especially impressive.
With its choppy pacing and tentative acting, the movie often feels like a montage of film clips hastily pasted together to tell a story. And although that story eventually comes into focus, much of what surrounds it is fuzzy and unclear. One moment ''Biker Boyz'' acts like a chipper dance-party movie; the next it dons brass knuckles and tosses around the same old overused gangsta-rap insults. No sooner has the movie raised the possibility of a bitter racial competition between white and black bikers than it scurries away from the premise.
Mr. Luke, in his first major role since ''Antwone Fisher,'' is Kid, an aspiring motorcycle racer whose father, Slick Will (Eriq La Salle), Smoke's obsequiously worshipful mechanic, dies in an accident early in the movie. Even then, Kid itches to race with the big boys. But it isn't until he and two friends form their own racing club, the Biker Boyz, that Smoke, who controls the underground racing scene, grudgingly gives him the time of day.
Shortly after Will's death, Kid's mother, Anita (Vanessa Bell Calloway), shocks her son with the news that Smoke is really his father. Smoke is equally surprised when she drops the same bombshell on him, then begs him to prevent Kid from racing. But the harder Smoke tries to discourage Kid, the more determined he becomes. It's in his blood, you see.
The drama builds to a climactic race between father and son to determine which will be forced to retire. With its theme of father-son competition, ''Biker Boyz'' is chock full of mythic potential. But the movie is so sloppily written and directed that its bits of bluster never cohere. As Kid, Mr. Luke, who exudes a clean-cut glow, is forced to bounce between irreconcilable extremes of shy, well-spoken courtliness and surly rebellion.
Subsidiary characters drift aimlessly in and out of the movie. Meagan Good, as Kid's sweetheart, is sweetly decorative. Lisa Bonet, as a veteran biker chick and Smoke's on-again girlfriend seems so battle-fatigued that whenever the two get together, they collapse in exhaustion. Kid Rock as Smoke's chief rival, Dogg, shows he's no actor. Djimon Hounsou and Tyson Beckford aren't required to act; all they have to do is pose.
''Biker Boyz''
~
Once you get past its supremely nonsensical title, ''Final Destination 2,'' a smooth and sharp slice of teen-gothic cheese, is kind of fun. If your memory of the first ''Final Destination'' is fuzzy, the sequel is generous with reminders. Back then -- a year before the new picture takes place, three years ago in real calendar time -- a group of young people escaped death in a terrible plane crash after one of them foresaw the catastrophe. But death, it turns out, hates cheaters and so contrived to pick the survivors off one by one in some imaginatively gruesome ways.
Now, the last one left, a sharp-faced blonde marvelously named Clear Rivers (Ali Larter), has locked herself up in a padded cell, hoping to ward off her fate. She is visited there one day by Kimberly Corman (A. J. Cook), whose premonition of disaster has recently saved her and a diverse group of strangers (including a pregnant woman, a drug addict, a black guy, a teenager and his mom) from a horrendous pileup (or, as a local news anchor pronounces it, polyp) on the interstate. With the help of a sympathetic state trooper (Michael Landes), Clear and Kimberly join forces to cheat the reaper once again.
And cheaters, once again, are dealt with harshly. Death, while grim and grisly, turns out to have a rather impish sense of humor -- it is, indeed, a practitioner of irony in the loose, Alanis Morissette sense. (In case you've forgotten, Ms. Morissette finds irony in rain on your wedding day and a free ride when you've already paid.) For instance: ''Have you ever seen anything creepy or ominous -- an in-your-face irony sort of thing?'' Clear asks Kimberly, who, on reflection, discovers that she has. (In-your-face irony is death's calling card.) Later, a television news reporter utters the following remarkable sentence, my favorite in a screenplay so far this year: ''Ironically, the woman was impaled through the head after her air bag inflated.'' The death of irony? Not if death has anything to say about it.
If you take a few minutes to come up with some variations on the impaled-head theme, you may already have written the screenplay for ''Final Destination 3.'' The current installment, directed by David R. Ellis from a screenplay by J. Mackye Gruber and Eric Bress, has a ghoulish wit. It's not as cheekily knowing as the ''Scream'' movies or as trashily Grand Guignol as the ''Evil Dead'' franchise, but like those pictures it recognizes the close relationship between fright and laughter, and dispenses both with a free, unpretentious hand. The first postpolyp death in particular -- I won't give away the order of the victims, which is a particular obsession of the fastidious dark force -- is a slyly choreographed exercise in Rube Goldberg mayhem involving a refrigerator magnet, some leftover Chinese food, a garbage disposal and a fire escape. A later episode makes inventive use of a dentist's chair, some very stupid pigeons, a fish tank and a pane of glass suspended from a crane. Later, as time runs short and a half-dozen victims still remain, the accidents are quicker and less elaborate -- beheading by elevator, exploding oxygen tanks, that sort of thing.
''Final Destination 2,'' which opens today nationwide, is an apt -- perhaps even a therapeutic -- entertainment for these jumpy times. The opening car crash reminded me of the cautionary films my driver's ed teacher used to show, in which youthful irresponsibility is bloodily punished by the hand of Fate. Everything in this movie's cosmos is an accident waiting to happen, and if such a view of the world can be paranoia-inducing, it can also be liberating. If your name is on Death's list, all the precautions in the world are futile, so you might as well live recklessly. Throw that refrigerator magnet in the microwave, disable your air bag, sign yourself out of that padded cell and go see a movie.
''Final Destination 2'' 
~
''The Recruit,'' which opens nationwide today, takes place within the shadowy world of the Central Intelligence Agency, where, we are repeatedly told, nothing is what it seems. This is true of the movie as well: it seems like a spy thriller, but it really isn't. Sure, there are car and foot chases, some gunplay, a lot of breathless exposition and the frenetic uploading and downloading of files that is a staple of the modern high-tech Hollywood suspense film.
But for all of its slick, manufactured suspense, and a ''surprise twist'' that will come as a surprise to exactly no one, this movie, directed with shrugging professionalism by Roger Donaldson (''No Way Out,'' ''13 Days''), belongs to a very special genre: the Al Pacino crazy mentor picture.
Examples include ''Donnie Brasco,'' ''Scent of a Woman,'' ''Devil's Advocate'' and ''Any Given Sunday.'' In each of these movies, Mr. Pacino is paired with a younger actor -- Johnny Depp, Chris O'Donnell, Keanu Reeves, Jamie Foxx -- to enact a peculiar generational battle whose outcome is usually a mutual learning of lessons.
Often, the temperamental contrast between the characters is reflected in approaches to acting. Mr. Pacino's style -- the Method gone mad -- is gestural and confrontational, with a lot of shouting and muttering, while his co-stars adopt a cooler, warier stance. His roots are in the heat and dust of midcentury American realist theater; theirs tend to be in the hip detachment of television. And though these movies vary in quality and interest, they share a lurching, improvisational rhythm that makes them interesting to watch.
In ''The Recruit,'' Mr. Pacino, with jet-black hair and a diabolical goatee, shambles and blusters in his usual way, turning the screenplay's flavorless dialogue (written by Roger Towne, Kurt Wimmer and Mitch Glazer) into mad poetry, full of non sequiturs, odd pauses and sudden barks and whispers. It is almost worth the price of a ticket (or at least of a video rental) to hear him utter the words ''Bethesda,'' ''Abu Nidal'' and ''Kurt Vonnegut,'' though not, I'm sad to say, in the same sentence, which would have been truly wonderful. Like Christopher Walken or Marlon Brando, Mr. Pacino frequently uses his gifts to make mediocre movies more interesting. Everything else in ''The Recruit'' may be tiresomely predictable, but he, at least, is not.
Mr. Pacino is playing -- not that it really matters, since his crazy mentor roles are best seen as episodes in a single continuing performance -- a man named Walter Burke, whose job is to recruit and train operatives for the C.I.A. His protégé is an M.I.T. graduate student named James Clayton (Colin Farrell), who, in addition to designing some kind of super-powerful software application, runs a Web site devoted to his father, an oil executive who died mysteriously in Peru.
Burke, who has ''a scary eye for talent,'' persuades James to come to the Farm, the agency's top secret training facility, a kind of Hogwarts for spies. There, the young man develops a crush on a fellow recruit named Layla (Bridget Moynahan) and endures a hall-of-mirrors initiation meant to test his mettle, throw him off balance and provide the audience with a few jolts and reversals in anticipation of the main event.
Which I won't give away beyond what the trailer has already spoiled. Nothing is what it seems. There is a mole somewhere. (Who could it be?) Someone is betraying someone else. (Guess who?) Poor Mr. Farrell spends his time in a caffeinated frenzy (though Layla is the habitual coffee drinker), trying to maintain his leading-man sang-froid while registering panic, stress and confusion. He is without question a handsome and hardworking actor (so hardworking, it appears, that he rarely has time to shave), but his charisma and intensity have yet to generate a truly interesting performance.
Some of the blame can no doubt be assigned to the material -- striving, clumsy, overdone pictures like ''Tigerland'' and ''Hart's War.'' But even as Tom Cruise's apparent nemesis in the excellent ''Minority Report,'' he seemed to be exerting himself to no clear purpose. Here, for all his confident smirking, anguished grimacing and brow-furrowing torment, his character remains a cipher. You never really wonder or care about James's motives or emotions.
Mr. Pacino, on the other hand, is an exuberant riddle, even though Burke's motives and emotions ultimately make no sense at all. Every time Burke opens his mouth, you wonder who on earth this guy is supposed to be, and your realization that the character, like the movie itself, is incoherently conceived hardly matters. It is both appalling and amusing to contemplate the C.I.A. as employing such a wing nut, especially as a teacher of the young. But really, what Mr. Pacino provides is an acting lesson, one that Mr. Farrell would do well to heed. In an unimaginative, by-the-book movie like this one, the best thing an actor can do is dare to be strange.
''The Recruit'' 
~
''The Guru'' has a canny, genre-bending gleam in its eye. If a martial-arts fantasy like ''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon'' can break the bank by taking Hong Kong-style action-adventure into the international mainstream, it supposes, how about mixing and matching a conventional romantic comedy with an Indian extravaganza: Hollywood meets Bollywood?
It doesn't work. The bizarre outcome of this nervy conceptual hybrid is a movie that plays stylistic hopscotch as it jumps from one square to the next, teetering perilously each time it lands on one quaking ankle. Lurching between a loudmouthed sitcom and a crude social satire, the movie, directed by Daisy von Scherler Mayer from a screenplay by Tracey Jackson, also shoehorns three imitation Bollywood production numbers into its uneasy mix. Following the Bollywood formula, the story is put on hold for a deliriously glitzy interlude of singing, dancing, grinning and booty shaking.
''The Guru'' and its title character, Ramu (Jimi Mistry), exhibit a particular fondness for the movie musical ''Grease.'' The opening scene observes Ramu as a boy sneaking out of a gaudy home-grown singing and dancing extravaganza to watch John Travolta and Olivia Newton John hollering at each other in a neighboring movie theater. Jumping ahead several years, the movie finds Ramu teaching disco dancing while nurturing ''Saturday Night Fever'' dreams of glory.
Letters from a relative in New York who describes a life of penthouses and fancy cars whet his appetite to move to the United States, where Ramu assumes that imminent stardom awaits him.
Arriving in New York, Ramu discovers that those letters were lies and finds himself sharing cramped quarters in Queens with several other young men and working as a waiter in an Indian restaurant. His first casting call takes him to the set of a pornographic movie, where he fails his audition but forms a tentative friendship with the doe-eyed co-star, Sharonna (Heather Graham), a part-time schoolteacher (engaged to a strait-laced firefighter) who secretly moonlights as an X-rated star.
Sharonna takes it upon herself to tutor Ramu in relaxation techniques that will help him perform on the set. Her exercises include nuggets of dumb, sexually oriented psychobabble, one of which involves chanting some of the more fatuous phrases of Billy Joel's ''Just the Way You Are.''
It isn't long before Ramu achieves a different kind of stardom from what he had envisioned. While working as a caterer at the Indian-themed birthday party of Lexi (Marisa Tomei), a spoiled New York socialite searching for spiritual enlightenment, he is called in as a last-minute substitute for the guest swami who has passed out drunk. Swaddled in ill-fitting robes and an improvised turban, Ramu leads the guests in a ludicrous ritual that involves dancing the Macarena and during which, for lack of anything better to say, he offers Sharonna's ditsy maxims for erotic self-help as scripture.
The birthday girl, a whiny, possessive nightmare, latches on to Ramu as her own personal guru (and stud) and begins spreading the word about her brilliant new discovery. Enter an agent, and presto: Ramu, officially billed as the Sex Guru, is driving the car of his dreams and preaching his bogus feel-hot gospel to a sold-out Broadway house. The movie's funniest moment is a shot of his worshipful flock swaying with their arms over their heads while mooing ''Just the Way You Are.''
When ''The Guru'' is spoofing the pretensions of the idle rich in search of spiritual connection, it scores some broad satirical points. But apart from its Bollywood tributes, its intercultural perspective is as naïve as a period spoof of pseudo-hip swingers flapping around Maharishi Mahesh Yogi after his discovery by the Beatles.
Mr. Mistry's Ramu is reasonably likable, if a bit pompous. It is the least caricatured performance amid an ensemble of one-note cartoons. Besides Ms. Tomei's shrill socialite, they include Ms. Graham's simpering good-bad girl and Christine Baranski's over-the-top portrayal of Lexi's huffy, snobbish mother, Chantal.
Behind its Hollywood-meets-Bollywood banner, ''The Guru,'' which opens today nationally, is a grindingly conventional comedy that insists on tying up its subplots in pretty ribbons and bows. Inevitably Ramu and Sharonna begin falling in love. The firefighting fiancé, Rusty (Dash Mihok), who stands in their way, proves no problem once he spills his personal beans at the inevitable end-of-the-movie wedding. Even the insufferable Lexi suddenly grows up and becomes a selfless, enlightened dispenser of peace and harmony. Need I say that this movie will not lead you to God?
''The Guru'' 
~
Most of the meager charms of the chaotic romantic farce ''A Guy Thing'' spring from the deft comic contortions of Hollywood's ultimate nerdy sidekick, Jason Lee. As Paul Morse, a Seattle ad salesman about to marry his boss's daughter, Karen (Selma Blair), this 32-year-old actor expands from the blandly goofy Keanu-manqué he often plays into a variation on the comic leading man Ben Stiller has made into a specialty.
But while Mr. Stiller's neurotic alter egos crackle with a frizzy-haired, whiz-kid sensitivity, Mr. Lee's beleaguered man-child dons a self-protective mask of boyish naïveté. Behind his calculated blankness you sense the sly amusement of an inveterate prankster getting away with mischief. His character in ''A Guy Thing'' survives a succession of physical and psychic humiliations brought on by his own cowardice to emerge battered but with his dignity reasonably intact. But even if he's an inch or two closer to maturity, it remains miles out of reach.
Paul's troubles begin the morning after his bachelor party (six days before the wedding), when his future mother-in-law telephones to announce that his fiancée is on her way over to his house. Gazing across the bed, he discovers a strange young woman lying on the next pillow. The beautiful stranger, Becky (Julia Stiles), is none too pleased when Paul abruptly shoos her out of his apartment before she can retrieve her underwear, which he discovers in the nick of time, allowing him to hide it inside his toilet tank. (Not to worry; that underwear makes a dramatically soggy reappearance late in the film.)
Things worsen when Paul discovers in the middle of a business presentation that he has an acute case of crabs and goes into a scratching fit. His embarrassment is compounded at the drug store, where he runs into his future mother-in-law while buying delousing medication and tries to cover up his mission by enlisting the pharmacist in an animated discussion of crabmeat recipes. (Yes, the jokes are that idiotic.)
Adding to Paul's anxiety, Becky keeps popping up everywhere he turns. And when it emerges that she is also Karen's cousin, he flies into a panic. But even after Becky assures Paul of her silence and that, in any case, nothing happened between them, he remains so fearful of Karen's wrath that he keeps piling on lies.
The movie becomes so desperate for adrenaline that it throws Paul another nasty curve by having him stalked by Becky's crazy ex-boyfriend, Ray (Lochlyn Munro), a sadistic, muscle-bound cop who likes to flex his pectorals in the mirror and crow, ''Well, hello, fellas.'' Eventually, Becky and Paul find themselves cringing behind the glass doors of Ray's bathtub as his guard dog lunges at them. How and why did they land there? It's not worth asking.
''A Guy Thing,'' which opens nationwide today, was adapted from a story by Greg Glienna, one of the writers of ''Meet the Parents,'' and much of it plays like a confused, desperate rehash of that hit comedy starring Robert De Niro and Mr. Stiller. Once again, an insecure young man has to run a humiliating obstacle course to please an intimidating future father-in-law, but this time that dad, Ken (James Brolin), is not the leading character. With his gleaming, gunmetal coif and eyes narrowed into the bullying squint of a drill instructor, Mr. Brolin clearly relishes his caricature of a macho chief executive who rationalizes questionable male behavior with four words: ''We're men, we're hunters.''
''A Guy Thing,'' directed by Chris Koch, lives up to its title in its haphazard treatment of its women. Ms. Blair's one-note fiancée is nothing more than a walking danger signal. And the dull, underwritten role of Becky is an unfortunate misstep for Ms. Stiles, a serious actress from whom comedy does not seem to flow naturally. Applying her best Jane Fonda voice to the zany, free-spirited Becky, Ms. Stiles sounds matter-of-fact when she should sparkle.
As Becky and Paul grow to realize that they're made for each other, the story presents her as liberating him into a more adventurous, easygoing way of life. But what does that really mean? Paul's inner daredevil is supposedly unleashed when she takes him on a high-speed car ride through a hilly section of the city, and he decides to sit back and enjoy the ride. Some liberation!
''A Guy Thing'' 
~
Steve Zahn and Martin Lawrence play a mismatched pair of security guards in ''National Security,'' an interracial buddy action comedy opening nationwide today. As such relationships go, theirs is admirably egalitarian. They take turns driving, shooting guns and punching each other in the face.
The two men are about the same size and shape -- a bit stubby for action-hero athleticism, perhaps, but nothing a little fast editing can't fix -- and have similarly antic personalities.
Mr. Zahn, however, who has been a shambling, volatile doofus in movies like ''Joyride'' and ''Riding in Cars With Boys,'' must here shoulder the white-man's-interracial-buddy-movie burden, which is to be the ill-tempered, badly dressed foil for his fast-talking, wildly unpredictable African-American counterpart. (It would require many column inches to list the variations on this indefatigable movie theme. The modern template is probably ''48 Hours''; a notable exception to the rule of white-guy stolidity versus black-guy volatility is the ''Lethal Weapon'' series with Danny Glover and Mel Gibson.)
As Hank Rafferty, a disgraced Los Angeles police officer, Mr. Zahn, in an unflattering mustache, a flat-top haircut and a succession of undistinguished plaid shirts, is restricted to scowling, ranting and grimacing. Mr. Lawrence, meanwhile, is given free rein to mug, riff and ramble in his familiar cartoon style.
He also has the honor of owning the movie's catchphrase. ''What the problem is?'' Mr. Lawrence's character, a police academy reject named Earl Montgomery, asks again and again. It's a rhetorical question, of course, but the problems of ''National Security'' are extensive enough to defy summary in the available space. For starters, there is a thorough -- you might almost say a systematic -- lack of imagination in the script (by Jay Scherick and David Ronn), the direction (by Dennis Dugan), the camerawork, the music and the acting. There are quite a few nerve-racking car chases, which seem to have been spliced together from old episodes of ''Starsky and Hutch,'' right down to the period-appropriate cars and vans. The hip-hop-inflected soundtrack, which is not bad, is interrupted by deafening gunfire and, sometimes simultaneously, by Mr. Lawrence's motor-mouthed improvisations.
''Do you really believe the stuff that comes out of your mouth?'' Hank asks Earl at one point. ''I don't know till I'm finished talking,'' Earl replies. Of course, he's never really finished talking, but the remark nicely sums up both what is irritating about Mr. Lawrence's comic style and what makes it intermittently funny. The sheer quantity of his verbiage increases the statistical likelihood that he will get off a good line now and then, and he does. (To repeat them here would be to deny you what little pleasure this movie affords.)
He is also good at feigning hurt, outrage and soulfulness, though his emotions always resolve into a manic playfulness edged with both anxiety and hostility. Like most comedians, he desperately wants to be liked, and at the same time he seems repelled by his own neediness, which produces an occasional feeble gesture of contempt.
Mr. Zahn, for his part, seethes and stews as the two of them trudge through the usual obstacles on the path from mutual hatred to brotherly respect. Their first meeting, which results in Hank's being convicted of police brutality and sent to prison for six months, is a lame attempt to inject a bit of raw topicality into the picture's tired racial humor (and also a sloppy stab at physical comedy). Since ''48 Hours,'' in which Nick Nolte's angry white cop wore his bigotry like a badly concealed weapon, the dynamics of race in popular culture have grown both more complicated and more equivocal, but ''National Security'' lacks the wit to do anything new and instead recycles tired jokes and attitudes. After ''What the problem is?'' Earl's most frequently repeated question is ''Is it because I'm black?''
The plot? Oh, yes, I almost forgot -- and so did the filmmakers, who have stapled together some shady business involving dirty cops and stolen metals, masterminded by a villain named Nash (Eric Roberts, with tattoos and platinum blond hair, looking less malevolent than depressed), who was responsible for the death of Earl's partner. Also on hand, looking even wearier than Mr. Roberts, is Bill Duke playing a glowering L.A.P.D. lieutenant who must endure quite a bit of Earl and Hank's ricocheting shtick. Mr. Duke is so much taller than they are that the camera has trouble holding all three of them in the frame, but he often looks as if he would be happier somewhere else. His look of impassive disgust makes him the audience's surrogate.
''National Security'' 
~
''Narc'' opens with a scene of a police chase gone awry, and Nick Tellis (Jason Patric), the Detroit cop responsible for the bloody mess -- a pregnant woman is the victim, and this physical shock is just one of the details in the grim, realistic clutter -- is shoved on a lurid descent into paranoia.
Instead of attempting another jacked-up gunfire drama, like his previous high-voltage ''Blood, Guts, Bullets and Octane,'' the writer and director Joe Carnahan has made a believable, fleshed-out film where men's worst impulses lead to their ruin. He's considerably more measured about the doses of adrenaline administered in ''Narc,'' and we're rewarded with a cohesive and mostly coherent story of a guilt-ridden cop who has nowhere to turn.
Mr. Patric is a specialist in repressed intensity, and he clenches his lower jaw as if trying to give Tom Cruise a run for his money in the I'm-so-wired sweepstakes. His Nick Tellis is a taut, closed-off man who somehow taints everything he comes in contact with. He seems perpetually on the verge of blowing a gasket. You can almost hear the blood rushing through his head. (It's a throwaway joke that such out-of-control police specimens are supposed to be keeping our streets safe.)
Trapped at home with his wife and baby, Nick shows a tenderness with his child that bespeaks a need to reach out to someone who won't misunderstand what he's trying to say. He seems dangerous until he's matched up with the leather-skinned, bullying Henry Oak (Ray Liotta), a man for whom even breathing is an act of defiance. Nick has been given a reprieve, assigned to find a cop killer; Oak is the dead man's ex-partner.
There's not a sense of antiseptic sterility here: the Detroit of ''Narc,'' which opens today in New York City and Los Angeles, is so run down that paint seems to be peeling off the sky. Oak is a tarnished knight who loves every inch of oxidation on his armor; he never shies away from a fight, and when there isn't one in the vicinity, he starts his own tumult.
Mr. Carnahan has selected two actors who have played these roles before. Mr. Patric was the tortured officer sweating away his future in ''Rush,'' and Mr. Liotta has acted the runaway train of a cop so many times (''Cop Land'' and ''Unlawful Entry'') that playing a sociopath with a badge couldn't possibly offer him anything new. But they both surprise.
Mr. Patric makes Nick an adult with a sense of shame; he has some pride in his work that he never gets a chance to show. His commitment is seen when he's paired with Oak, who's more than a fist-swinging thug. Oak has worked out a funky brand of decorum for his rough-justice type of police work. His take on keeping the streets safe reflects a larger truth of callousness as an aspect of some law enforcement.
Perhaps because ''Narc'' isn't the standard-issue story of family dysfunction, it didn't stir the air much at this year's Sundance Film Festival. In the interim, though, the movie caught the attention of Tom Cruise, who signed on as executive producer; Harrison Ford is scheduled to star in Mr. Carnahan's next project.
It's hard to imagine that Mr. Carnahan's command of the film and the enjoyably ratty slices of life that Oak and Nick carve out didn't impress the crowd at Park City, Utah. It could be that the references in ''Narc'' to other movies didn't fall into the somber 70's family melodramas that the majority of Sundance entries so modestly emulate. (Whatever your feelings are about ''Narc,'' you probably won't doze off during the picture.) One of the biggest scenes features a snitch being tortured in a chair, reminiscent of ''Reservoir Dogs'' or the recent Whitney Houston-Bobby Brown session with Diane Sawyer.
There are a few other shocks by the end, involving Oak's character. On the other hand, there are a few disappointments, too. Cleveland or Toronto or Queens or whatever stands in for the Motor City that Carnahan depicts isn't entirely convincing as Detroit, though obviously a few exteriors were caught there. But ''Narc'' is convincing, an entertaining, grimy view of the traps of machismo tucked inside a cop thriller.
''Narc'' 
~
Although ''Orange County'' lasts less than an hour and a half, it often feels like six different movies fighting each other for attention. It is much less, in the end, than the sum of its parts. Some of the parts, happily, are inventive and funny, but the picture, unruly as it is, is ultimately as indecisive and tentative as its hero, a suburban teenager named Shaun Brumder, played with wide-eyed agitation by Colin Hanks.
Shaun is a reformed surfer, whose life has been changed by the drowning of one of his buddies (an event played, disconcertingly, for laughs) and his accidental discovery of a novel called ''Straightjacket.'' Its author, Marcus Skinner (Kevin Kline, in a tweedy, understated cameo) teaches English at Stanford. Shaun resolves to become a writer and applies to Stanford in the hope of studying at his idol's feet.
Standing in his way are a family whose gothic-comic dysfunctions suggest a sunnier, less bloody ''American Beauty,'' a spaced-out guidance counselor (Lily Tomlin) and a general atmosphere of suburban shallowness. Shaun's mother (Catherine O'Hara) is a weepy, boozy fright, married to a drooling invalid. Dad is a sleek narcissist with a barely legal trophy wife and a feral toddler. This brat is nonetheless better socialized (and perhaps more successfully toilet trained) than Shaun's other brother, Lance (Jack Black), a drug-addled layabout who regards Shaun mainly as a convenient source of clean urine samples.
The only stable person in Shaun's life -- the only person in Orange County as sweet and bland as he is -- is his girlfriend, Ashley (Schuyler Fisk), who wishes he would stay and attend the local university with her.
When Shaun discovers that a bureaucratic mix-up has cost him a spot at Stanford, he concocts, with Ashley's help and, later, Lance's, a series of unlikely schemes to talk his way in. These end, mostly thanks to Lance, in disaster, but along the way Shaun learns some important, and entirely predictable, lessons as the story winds toward a slapdash happy ending.
The movie, directed by Jake Kasdan from a script by Mike White (who appears as an English teacher even more air-headed than most of his students), is as full of youth-comedy stock characters, and as wildly overplotted, as ''Not Another Teen Movie.'' Its best humor has a madcap, throwaway quality, and there are two extended sequences of inspired farcical catastrophe, one in Shaun's living room and one at the Stanford admissions office. Both rely on Mr. Black's willingness to run around in his underwear, something he does better than just about anyone else in movies these days. I don't mean this as faint praise; there's a lot of competition.
But in ''Orange County'' the gags and subplots, rather than adding up to sustained hilarity, compete with each other. The tame, wholesome teen comedy represented by Ashley and Shaun, complete with teary moments, implausible rifts and equally implausible reconciliation, bumps uneasily against the hard edges of satire and the squishy excrescences of gross-out stoner humor.
Shaun's life is so overloaded -- the dead friend, the surviving surfer pals, the literary ambition, the family, the girlfriend -- that his character is all but obscured. (Ashley's, meanwhile, barely exists.) Mr. Hanks, son of Tom, has a likable enough screen presence, and when he gets worked up his nice-guy-in-distress blustering may remind you of his father (or of his father doing an impression of Jimmy Stewart).
Some moments, especially when Ms. O'Hara is onscreen, have the campy, almost creepy intimacy that Mr. White has shown in projects like ''Chuck and Buck'' and ''Pasadena,'' his criminally neglected Fox series. At his best, he has a sense of human strangeness that pushes far beyond the narrow boundaries of conventional youth comedy into which ''Orange County'' has been shoehorned.
''Orange County'' 
~
