IN ''Collateral,'' the edgy new thriller from the director Michael Mann, the city never sleeps; it doesn't even relax. Set in Los Angeles mostly after dark, after the city's sunshine has given way to cool noir, the story centers on a taxi driver, Max (Jamie Foxx), and the assassin Vincent (Tom Cruise), who hops a ride with him deep into the night. As the pair cover the city, looping over interchanges and down wide open boulevards, they travel a landscape alive with wild animals and wilder men, noisy with unfamiliar music and chatter, and punctured by the hard pop of occasional gunfire.
Following a few preliminaries, including some flirty minutes with Jada Pinkett Smith as a harried passenger, the story gets down to its dirty business with Vincent jumping into Max's meticulously clean taxicab. Nattily turned out in a gray suit and matching salt-and-pepper hair and light beard, Vincent takes the story precisely seven minutes east of downtown.
With the meter running, Max waits for his fare, fetishistically poring over luxury-car brochures and fantasizing about the limousine company he hopes to start. Then a body lands splat on the roof of the taxi, shattering the cabbie's nerves and a large section of his front window, and Stuart Beattie's screenplay kicks into overdrive. Vincent, Max discovers to his horror, is a killer for hire, and this is only the first stop on what looks to be a very strange trip.
Wired for action, ''Collateral,'' which opens nationwide today, initially seems like a return to basics for Mr. Mann, as exemplified by ostensibly straight early films like ''Thief,'' about a safecracker in love, and a retreat from the more self-consciously serious films like ''Ali,'' his underrated movie about the legendary boxer.
The new film takes place against a backdrop that pits a drug cartel against law enforcement agencies presumably intent on shutting it down, and to that end features big, beefy men wielding big, scary guns and the jolting image of Vincent hitting his marks, specifically with two bullets to the chest and one through the head. But because Mr. Mann makes thrillers the way that John Ford made westerns, using genre as a way into meaning rather than as an escape, ''Collateral'' bears little relation to the usual Hollywood blowout.
That becomes evident as Max and Vincent drive through the emptied-out streets and the story shifts from a two-hander to a road movie, a tourist-board nightmare and a bloodied valentine to the director's adopted hometown. A portrait of radically different souls clinging to radically different paths, ''Collateral'' hinges on the moment when fate intersects with choice.
Vincent is clearly a nutcase, seething with inarticulate rage and locked-down demons, but he's also a man seemingly in charge of his destiny. For Max, who's been hanging onto his well-tended fantasy for years (''this is just part time,'' he repeatedly insists of his hack job), his passenger represents an imminent threat, but also a necessary wake-up call. For Mr. Mann, it always seems, there is nothing worse than a life on automatic pilot, not even death.
Mr. Foxx can't have had an easy time playing foil to the world's biggest movie star, but he holds his own gracefully. For his part, Mr. Cruise, whose famous self-discipline has helped turn him into a bankable personality and a less-than-believable regular guy, makes Vincent scarily convincing. Underappreciated as an actor, Mr. Cruise is most at ease when he can deliver a good portion of his performance through his body. He's an intensely physical performer, one whose jumping muscles and athleticism often express the inner workings of his characters more plausibly than any scripted line. Clad in the sort of form-fitting, slightly too-short slacks favored more by modern dancers and Gene Kelly than (I assume) contract killers, he plays Vincent from the outside in, as a citadel of physical perfection and ability.
That makes the star an ideal fit not merely for this role but for this director, whose male characters inevitably express themselves more through their deeds than their words. One of the signatures of Mr. Mann's films is that while his male characters tend to be tight-lipped (if often very loud and certainly dogged in their beliefs), the director's visual style and musical choices verge on the extreme, at times the operatic. Filled with incessant rhythms, washes of gaudy color and heartbreaking beauty, the films boldly convey the passions and deep feelings the director's men rarely voice. It's the sort of expressionistic gambit that pointedly makes the case that movies create meaning both with what's on the scripted page and with images of palm trees bobbing against a moonlit sky and the everyday Los Angeles surrealism of coyotes prowling an otherwise urban street.
Pitched between interludes of anxious intimacy and equally nerve-shredding set pieces, ''Collateral'' scores its points with underhand precision. The film is about a lot of different things, about how Los Angeles lights up at night, how cars become prostheses of ourselves and how driving with the radio on can be bliss. But as with all of Mr. Mann's movies, ''Collateral'' is finally about men and work, and about how being a man is itself a kind of job. (It's no wonder the director gives the Sears ''Craftsman'' logo a loving nod.) Whether chasing fictionalized serial killers or those serial killers who run tobacco companies, Mr. Mann's men risk everything -- happiness, women, life itself -- to get the job done, which explains why these fastidiously executed commercial films are not just entertainments, but statements of personal faith.
It's in this sense that despite the spent bullets and fallen bodies, ''Collateral'' is very much the product of a distinct vision, one as eager to push technological limits (the film was shot with the most advanced video cameras) as to upend the usual studio white-hero/black-villain formula. For the director, such casting isn't a sop to political correctness, but a reflection of his city's demographics. Unmistakably urban, Mr. Mann's Los Angeles is a city where not every black man knows how to handle a gun, where Korean and Latino revelers jam dance clubs rarely seen in pop culture and where a light-rail line nicknamed the Ghetto Blue promises salvation after a really, really bad night behind the wheel. Best of all, it's a city where, if someone asks with corrosive incredulity, ''Do you like it here?,'' the only plausible answer is, ''It's my home.''
''Collateral'' 
~
THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE,'' which opens today nationwide, is Jonathan Demme's second attempt to update a classic cold war thriller. Two years ago, in ''The Truth About Charlie,'' he tried to drag ''Charade,'' Stanley Donen's suave Hitchcockian romance, into the messy, multicultural modern world, an admirable effort that unfortunately did not yield a very enjoyable movie, in spite of the charms of Thandie Newton.
This time, using John Frankenheimer's original adaptation of Richard Condon's novel as a touchstone rather than a template, Mr. Demme has been more successful. Not only has he made a political thriller that manages to be at once silly and clever, buoyantly satirical and sneakily disturbing, but he has recovered some of the lightness and sureness of touch that had faded from his movies after ''The Silence of the Lambs.''
Some of the fun of his retrofitted ''Candidate,'' which opens with Wyclef Jean's bracing version of John Fogerty's ''Fortunate Son,'' comes from its playful acknowledgment of -- and frequent departure from -- the first version, which was released in 1962, just in time for the Cuban missile crisis. The very first scenes peek in on a long, raucous game of poker, and fans of Mr. Frankenheimer's movie may anticipate the fateful appearance of the queen of diamonds. But this, like other winking evocations of the old ''Candidate,'' is a tease.
The game Mr. Demme and the screenwriters, Daniel Pyne and Dean Georgaris, are playing involves a different set of strategies and symbols, as well as altered stakes.
The first ''Manchurian Candidate'' was an exemplary piece of liberal paranoia, imagining the nefarious collusion between foreign, Communist totalitarians and their most ferocious domestic enemies, a conspiracy of the political extremes against the middle. That film, which climaxed at the 1956 Republican convention in New York, looked back from Camelot at an almost-plausible alternative history with a mixture of alarm and relief. The center, in the solid person of John F. Kennedy's pal Frank Sinatra, had held.
The new version, after a prologue in the first Persian Gulf war, unfolds at a time succinctly and scarily identified as ''today,'' and proceeds from the nominating convention of a major political party toward a frenzied Election Night finale, feeding on an anxiety about the future that is neither exaggerated nor easily assuaged. Sinatra's character, Maj. Ben Marco, is played by Denzel Washington, and this time Marco is not the cool, rational unraveler of a vast conspiracy, but rather one of its victims.
The public, coming upon this movie in a fraught political season, may be more interested in identifying the perpetrators. Though the party in question is not identified, it does not much resemble the real-world party currently in power. In the movie the United States is subject to terrorist attacks, which have become so routine that they are mentioned only in passing, and is fighting wars in small countries around the world.
The chief danger to the republic, however, emanates not from the extremes -- a fanatical foreign enemy combined with a zealous administration -- but from the center, from the moderate wing of the opposition party and its corporate sponsors. In a smokeless back room at the convention, a venerable, liberal senator, played by Jon Voight (who does this kind of thing so often you may think he's playing himself), is dumped from the ticket in favor of Raymond Shaw (Liev Schreiber), a young New York congressman whose mother, Senator Eleanor Shaw (Meryl Streep), is a formidable power broker and a tireless promoter of her son's career.
You may notice a slight resemblance to a certain real-life New York senator, but Ms. Streep's swaggering, ice-cube-chewing performance is too full of inspired, unpredictable mischief to be mere mimickry.
Poor Raymond, a queasy-looking fellow who won the Congressional Medal of Honor for heroism in the gulf war, turns out to be at the center of a diabolical conspiracy involving military adventurism, maternal monstrousness and big business string-pulling. ''Manchurian'' no longer refers to a region in China, but rather to a multinational defense conglomerate whose mind-control techniques are much more high-tech then the Maoist-Freudian brainwashing methods that were popular back in 1962. (The queen of diamonds is redundant when you can implant subcutaneous chips, though the Oedipus complex does seem to have survived the collapse of Communism.)
Are we meant to think of Halliburton? Maybe, but this film's political sensibility is less Kerry-Edwards than McCain-Feingold. The shadowy desire for total political control that scared us in the cold war -- the threat of ''powers that will make martial law look like anarchy,'' as Angela Lansbury so memorably put it in the earlier film -- seems impossibly quaint next to the mundane, insatiable drive to wring profit out of the world's instability.
The conspiracy -- which the chip implanted in my own skin prevents me from discussing further -- seems at once overreaching and curiously undermotivated. Its details and parameters are also not fully explained, which makes the tangle of plot twists at the end feel a little dishonest. But the story, as in ''Silence of the Lambs,'' is designed mainly to keep you alert and on edge so that you can appreciate Mr. Demme's eye for detail and his cast's witty bravado.
Kimberly Elise slyly revises a part originated by Janet Leigh, and Jeffrey Wright and Bruno Ganz are memorably strange in small roles. Mr. Schreiber looks a lot like Laurence Harvey, the first Raymond Shaw, which may have prevented him from reinventing his character as thoroughly as he might have.
Like Frankenheimer (and also like Brian DePalma in ''Blow-Out'') Mr. Demme grasps the aesthetic potential of political suspicion. A crucial symptom of clinical paranoia, after all, is the conviction that what seems to be offhand, incidental or meaningless is actually freighted with significance. It is a disorder well suited to movie watching (to say nothing of moviemaking), and Mr. Demme caters to it by filling his busy, hectic frames with tantalizing visual and aural clues that give the movie texture and momentum.
Our guide through this maze is Mr. Washington, who plays Major Marco with the perfect blend of stoicism and agitation. Marco, who was Raymond's commanding officer in Kuwait, is plagued by strange dreams, and by the growing suspicion that what he remembers of the gulf war is not what really happened. His search for the truth and his struggle to stay sane are fundamentally at cross purposes, since the closer he comes to an accurate version of events the crazier he seems, to himself and everyone else.
He must contend simultaneously with external events and internal demons, and this two-front battle plays out on Mr. Washington's downcast, noble features. He gives the film's extravagant public scandal a dimension of private sadness.
Whether it will have any political resonance remains to be seen. The uncanny implications of Frankenheimer's ''Candidate'' after all came into focus long after its initial release, when it re-emerged as a curious period artifact in the waning years of the cold war. Mr. Demme's version, in bright color rather than smoky black and white, is more transparent and less enigmatic. Though its intricate plot is full of surprises, this kind of story no longer has much power to shock. Maybe we've grown used to paranoia as the only sane response to a world beyond our comprehension or control. Or maybe we've been brainwashed.
''The Manchurian Candidate'' 
~
''Garden State,'' Zach Braff's small, smart, off-kilter comedy, has the cheek to present itself as ''The Graduate 2004,'' although its affectionate subversion of a popular classic also stamps it as ''The Anti-Graduate 2004.'' From its story of the awakening of an emotionally numbed young man -- played by Mr. Braff, who wrote and directed the movie -- to its editorial use of a contemporary pop soundtrack that throws in vintage Simon and Garfunkel (''The Only Living Boy in New York''), ''Garden State'' obsessively refers to that 1967 generational landmark.
The New Jersey suburban landscape to which Mr. Braff's 26-year-old alter ego, Andrew Largeman, returns from self-imposed exile in Los Angeles is a universe apart from the lotus land where he has lived for the last nine years in a chemical stupor. Because ''The Graduate'' established the stock vision of suburban alienation that has persisted through ''American Beauty'' and beyond, you expect ''Garden State'' to uphold the cliché. Instead, it allows Andrew to discover some nuggets of spiritual gold in the East Coast wasteland he dreaded revisiting.
At one point ''Garden State'' drops a comic reference to Aldous Huxley's ''Brave New World'' in which the author's name is misidentified as Huxtable. Like many passing references in ''Garden State,'' this one is far from accidental. Just as the happy citizens of Huxley's dystopia were pacified by a drug called soma (a sort of idealized hybrid of Prozac and Ecstasy), Andrew has spent years cut off from his darker feelings with the aid of pharmaceuticals (including lithium) prescribed by his father, Gideon (Ian Holm), a pompous psychiatrist.
What necessitates Andrew's return from the West Coast, where he works in a Vietnamese restaurant while struggling as an actor (he has had one prominent role in a made-for-TV movie), is his mother's death. Paraplegic from a freak accident for which Gideon tacitly blames his son, who was 9 at the time, his mother died at home in the bathtub. The father and son have never confronted the complicated layers of blame and guilt that have festered under Andrew's chemical insulation.
Because Andrew has left his medications in Los Angeles, his buried emotions begin to stir. If you take ''Garden State'' as a generational statement, the plastics of ''The Graduate'' have been replaced by prescription drugs as the symbolic soul-destroying enemy. Recreational drugs are also questioned in a scene in which Andrew and a bunch of high school friends break through uncomfortable social barriers with the shortcuts of Ecstasy and pot.
Without his medication Andrew experiences recurrent flash headaches. At his father's urging, he consults a neurologist (Ron Liebman), who finds nothing physically wrong but who gently advises him to switch psychiatrists.
In the doctor's waiting room Andrew meets Sam (Natalie Portman), a charming, uninhibited motormouth and pathological liar who suffers from epilepsy. The friendship they strike up quickly blossoms into something more. Andrew, who found himself unable to cry at his mother's grave, squeezes his first real tear into a paper cup she holds under his left eye.
As precocious filmmaking debuts tend to be, ''Garden State'' is too self-conscious by half, but its struggle to revitalize a cliché by turning it inside out is a worthy one. All the characters are aggressively quirky. Andrew's best friend from high school, Mark (Peter Sarsgaard), is a gravedigger and pothead who takes Andrew and Samantha to a quarry inhabited by a bohemian couple who live in a boat. Another high school friend, Albert (Denis O'Hare), who has made millions from patenting a no-noise version of Velcro, lives in a mansion devoid of furniture.
There is no Mrs. Robinson to skewer as a predatory spiritual vacuum. The movie goes out of its way to appreciate two unusual moms: Mark's pot-smoking mother, Carol (Jean Smart), and Sam's ultra-homey mother, Olivia (Ann Dowd), who has taken an African student into their home. Ms. Portman's manic Sam and Mr. Braff's depressed Andrew make an appealing couple.
As an actor, Mr. Braff (familiar from the television series ''Scrubs'') is a homely but handsome screen presence, like Dustin Hoffman's Benjamin Braddock. This movie's artfully lightheaded visual style combines the freneticism of vintage Richard Lester with the whimsy of Wes Anderson. When not whizzing to and fro, Lawrence Sher's cinematography occasionally pauses to frame an image with the same care for composition that Conrad L. Hall brought to ''American Beauty.''
But a scrupulous avoidance of any solemnity makes ''Garden State'' a bit too light for its own good. Its method of skipping from one incident to another feels scatterbrained, and promising characters are left behind in the rush. The forced feel-good ending seems tacked on, a thudding final sentence with too many exclamation points.
''Garden State'' 
~
It may sound odd to call a chilly, paranoid thriller like ''The Bourne Supremacy'' entertainment comfort food. But in the wake of 9/11, this globe-trotting post-cold-war melodrama full of standard cloak-and-dagger intrigue has the reassuring aroma of a home-cooked meal served while riding the world's smoothest roller coaster.
As the story unfolds at a whirring pace whose tremors flow like the seamless pulses in a sleek, percussive symphony, watching the movie feels like lying back after the meat loaf and mashed potatoes and being spoon-fed gourmet ice cream while the wind whistles in your ears.
There are no jihads or terrorists in sight and no apocalyptic scenarios, only dirty little secrets, as spies, counterspies and moles from Russia and the United States tangle in a grubby story involving oil, sold secrets, murders and cover-ups. Nor are there flashy computerized embellishments or martial arts stunts. This is high-speed action realism carried off with the dexterity of a magician pulling a hundred rabbits out of a hat in one graceful gesture. The crowning flourish is an extended car chase through the streets and tunnels of Moscow that ranks as one of the three or four most exciting demolition derbies ever filmed.
In this sequel to ''The Bourne Identity,'' many of the major hands who created the first film have returned. Doug Liman, the original director, is now an executive producer, and Paul Greengrass (who oversaw the docudrama ''Bloody Sunday'') has taken over as director. The screenwriter Tony Gilroy is back, as are the cinematographer Oliver Wood and the composer John Powell.
Crouched in the eye of the storm once again is Jason Bourne (Matt Damon), the C.I.A.-trained assassin who still has serious memory problems and can't recall why he is being hunted by everybody, although blurry flashbacks leave him with clues. As before, Jason spends almost the entire movie, which opens today nationwide, on the run.
The character, created by the novelist Robert Ludlum, is so resourceful that he might be described as Superman With Partial Amnesia. One of his favorite tricks is to call the people he's spying on and describe what he is observing through his telescopic lens. The movie reminds you that rhythms of film editing and collage-making have allowed Hollywood to make the chase movie a surefire format.
Other returning cast members include Franka Potente as Jason's sweetheart, Marie (her appearance is brief), and Brian Cox, Julia Stiles and Gabriel Mann as C.I.A. agents of varying rank. ''The Bourne Supremacy,'' like its predecessor, is not C.I.A.-friendly. In the light of recent headlines, that skepticism lends it an extra frisson of credibility.
In a movie in which most of the dialogue consists of curt exclamations, Jason may amount to little more than an embattled cipher. But Mr. Damon, who has shed much of his boyish ingenuousness (he is beginning to suggest the grown-up Robert Wagner), plays him as a cunning escape artist and technophile, with lightning reflexes as well as a streak of sadness.
The actor's masklike features suit his chameleonic character, but in the rare moments that his face softens, there is the suggestion that he will be the loneliest man in the world the moment that he stops running. The trickle of emotion leaking through his pressurized stress lends the movie an emotional undertone subtly accented by the weary sighs in Mr. Powell's otherwise propulsive score.
The story begins in Goa, India, where Jason and Marie hide until the arrival of a killer (Karl Urban), dispatched by a Russian oil mogul (Karel Roden), abruptly ends their idyll. At the same time, the C.I.A. is investigating the murder of two agents in Berlin, where a glaring fingerprint left at the scene of the crime points to Jason.
This time, a C.I.A. deputy, Pamela Landy (Joan Allen), pressures her boss, Ward Abbott (Mr. Cox), to reopen a case that was closed two years earlier and bring Jason down. In short order, a C.I.A. team led by Ms. Allen descends on Berlin. As usual, this actress is just about perfect: crisp but not frozen. Meanwhile, Jason's flight takes him from Goa to Naples to Berlin to Moscow as he eludes and battles one assassin after another.
As an action-movie travelogue, ''The Bourne Supremacy'' is unusually evocative. From its beaches of Goa to Berlin's clotted skyline to Moscow in the snow, its city lights glowing, it imparts a glamorized sense of tourism under duress.
Plot and character ultimately don't matter much in a movie that's all about building and sustaining a mood in which visceral and emotional rhythms are blended into a high-gloss thrill ride in which every curve and dip is calculated. Where most Hollywood action movies, edited within an inch of their lives, use split-second leaps and flashes as visual jolts to camouflage holes, ''The Bourne Supremacy'' knows what it's doing. Its relentless speed not only puts you in Jason's shoes by suggesting the adrenaline rush of a fugitive who has no time to look around, but also suggests Jason's quick thinking. If you pay close attention, you won't get lost. And even if you do, it doesn't take away from the fun.
''The Bourne Supremacy'' 
~
It's painfully understandable that the 17-year-old title character of ''Maria Full of Grace'' would risk her freedom and even her life to be a drug mule. This gripping Colombian film, written and directed by Joshua Marston, follows the desperate plunge of Maria Alvarez (Catalina Sandino Moreno) from a dead-end job as an assembly-line worker in a Colombian flower factory into the drug-smuggling underworld.
This treacherous territory, where young women, seduced by suave, sweet-talking recruiters, can earn large sums by smuggling heroin into the United States, is Maria's last resort when she finds herself unemployed and pregnant. Her ruthless new bosses make her former taskmasters look like angels.
Before the story zeroes in on the harrowing details of drug running and its dangers, it depicts Maria's hopelessly circumscribed life in the rural village where she lives with her mother, grandmother and sister. She is expected to turn over to the family the minuscule salary she earns dethorning roses in a sweatshop atmosphere.
Hounded by her boss to be more productive, she impulsively quits. Even when her family panics, she refuses to grovel to get her job back. She also becomes pregnant by her deadbeat boyfriend, Juan (Wilson Guerrero), who reluctantly offers to marry her. Because she doesn't love him, she turns down the proposal.
The movie, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, portrays Maria's story as a variation of the predicament that draws thousands of young Colombian women into the drug trade. Courted by Franklin (Jhon Alex Toro), a charming, motorcycle-riding recruiter she meets in a club, she is introduced to his ominously soothing boss, Javier (Jaime Osorio Gómez), who lays out the rules and invites her to try out for the role of illicit courier.
If Maria's story is a template for countless others like it, what keeps your heart in your throat during the movie is Maria herself. In a performance that feels lived in rather than acted, Ms. Moreno's Maria is an attractive, smart, spirited young woman who faces the challenge of fending for herself with a fierce determination and an ingenuity that compromises but never undermines her essential decency and morality.
Any hope of success as a smuggler requires that Maria lie with a straight face under extreme stress. Before flying to New York with trumped-up papers and cash, she trains for the job in practice sessions by swallowing large grapes that are the same size as the drug-filled pellets she'll carry in her stomach. Once she has mastered the technique, she gulps 62 pellets, along with medicine that slows the digestive system. If a single pellet breaks inside her, she's told, she will die of an overdose. And if she excretes any pellets before arriving on New York, she must immediately clean and re-ingest them.
Maria's journey from Bogotá to New York in a plane with three other smugglers is one of the tensest flights ever filmed. Upon her arrival she is pulled aside, interrogated and threatened with being X-rayed. Only her pregnancy prevents her from being internally examined and arrested.
In the film's ugliest scenes, Maria and two other women are roughly hustled into a car by thugs and driven to a sleazy New Jersey hotel, where they're dosed with laxatives and held prisoner. If one pellet breaks or is found missing, death is certain. If she escapes, she is warned, deadly reprisals will be taken against her family. Among the three other smugglers on the flight, one is incarcerated at the airport, while Maria's clinging best friend, Blanca (Yenny Paola Vega), who signed on to the program, and Lucy (Guilied López), an experienced smuggler with relatives in Queens, make it as far as New Jersey.
But the unpredictable story, which involves several cruel surprises, doesn't end there. Maria winds up in Queens, temporarily sheltered by Lucy's pregnant sister, Carla (Patricia Rae), and her husband in their tiny, overcrowded apartment. The movie offers a pungent and sympathetic look at the closely knit Colombian immigrant community, whose neighborhood leader, Don Fernando (Orlando Tobón), is a middleman among the immigrants, the drug lords and the sympathetic employers who help new arrivals get a foothold in the United States.
''Maria Full of Grace'' sustains a documentary authenticity that is as astonishing as it is offhand. Even when you're on the edge of your seat, it never sacrifices a calm, clear-sighted humanity for the sake of melodrama or cheap moralizing. Even the airport interrogators aren't monsters, just everyday officials efficiently carrying out their duties.
Maria's desperate decision may be reprehensible on one level. But on another, deeper level, it is an act of courageous self-assertion. You applaud every step of her scary lunge toward personal liberation.
''Maria Full of Grace'' 
~
John Irving's fictional landscapes have proven irresistibly appealing to filmmakers, but the charm can be deceiving, even hazardous. His novels, full of lovely detail and lively incident, also tend to include patches of boggy, squishy sentimentality and overdone whimsy. In adapting Mr. Irving's recent book ''A Widow For One Year,'' Tod Williams has avoided such perils to a degree that is almost miraculous. ''The Door in the Floor,'' a renamed, reconfigured film version of that novel, which Mr. Williams wrote and directed, is surely the best movie yet made from Mr. Irving's fiction. It may even belong in the rarefied company of movies that are better than the books on which they are based. And above all, Jeff Bridges offers perhaps the wittiest and richest piece of screen acting by an American man so far this year.
The narrative, revisiting some of Mr. Irving's sturdy preoccupations -- dead children, distant mothers, New England prep schools, the friction and affection between a bright young man and his older mentor -- is full of invitations to cuteness, contrivance and maudlin excess, all of which Mr. Williams confidently declines. Mr. Bridges and Kim Basinger play Ted and Marion Cole, a long-married couple still reeling from the deaths, some years earlier, of their two teenage sons. Their 4-year-old daughter, Ruth (Elle Fanning), was born after the car accident that killed her brothers, but rather than help her parents move beyond their grief she traps them inside it, and herself as well. A hallway in the Coles' rambling, shingled house in the Hamptons is lined with pictures of the boys, each one representing a story that Ted tells his daughter again and again.
He and Marion have decided to separate, an event that coincides with the arrival of Eddie O'Hare (Jon Foster), a boarding-school student who has come to spend a summer working as Ted's assistant. Eddie is an aspiring writer, and Ted is a famous author and illustrator of children's books, one of which gives the film its title. Eddie hopes to learn something about writing, and since this is in some ways a standard coming-of-age story, the lessons he receives are not necessarily the ones he expected. Before long, the young man discovers that his idol is a vain, self-involved semi-alcoholic, a disillusionment that is both quickened and assuaged once the young man starts sleeping with the idol's wife.
I'm sorry to dwell on the ways ''The Door in the Floor,'' which opens today in 19 places, could have gone wrong, but some sense of the risks that Mr. Williams was taking is necessary to appreciate his achievement. If you examine the story closely, you can find soft spots of implausibility and cliché. But the shakiness of some of the film's central ideas -- about parental mourning, about mature sexuality, about the way a young person's life can be changed forever by brief exposure to adult dysfunction -- matters far less than it might.
Mr. Williams, whose previous film was ''The Adventures of Sebastian Cole,'' resists the imperatives to streamline and shoehorn that afflict even the most sensitive screenwriters. (His producers also deserve credit for not imposing a more conventional structure on his film.) He takes his time with the story, meandering from one scene to the next and finding a halting, languorous rhythm that suits both the setting and the dominant mood of the characters.
If it seems like an unusually cold and foggy summer out on Long Island, so much the better, since the ambient mist provides the cinematographer, Terry Stacey, with a lovely palette of Japanese watercolor effects that mirror Ted's haunting ink-washed drawings.
For his part, Mr. Williams has composed a tableau of unusual vividness and variety. He has alighted on Mr. Irving's most admirable quality: his alert, amused sympathy with people in trouble, which turns out to be pretty much synonymous with life. ''The Door in the Floor'' nimbly shifts between melodrama and comedy, with a delightful and perfectly executed excursion into high farce near the end, and it seems perpetually to be discovering new possibilities for its characters. This is the kind of movie in which the most transient, incidental people -- a wealthy woman (Mimi Rogers) who models for Ted, her gardener (Louis Arcella), the haughty owner of a small framing shop (Donna Murphy) -- seem to have odd, complicated lives that keep going when they're not on screen.
Mr. Foster and Ms. Basinger are both very good, but the film is dominated by Mr. Bridges' performance. Ted is, in many ways, monstrous, using his charm and talent the way he uses sex and drink, as a defense against both intimacy and guilt. It makes a certain perverse sense that Mr. Bridges, one of the most generous and understated actors around, should be so good at playing a narcissist. Ted's chief source of pleasure is himself, and Mr. Bridges' is Ted. When asked if he is primarily a writer or an artist, he always gives the same answer (''I'm an entertainer of children, who loves to draw''), each time puffing up with delight and his gift for perfect understatement. Mr. Bridges has a similar gift, but his modesty is genuine (he never puffs up unless Ted does too), and it enables him both to lift the actors around him and to expose the hidden, sad corners of Ted's craggy, mercurial personality.
Screen acting rarely achieves a sense of completion, which consists, paradoxically, in our sense that what we see is incomplete: that there is more to a character than meets the eye. Ted Cole is a great movie character because, as inconsistent, contradictory and unpredictable as he is, Mr. Bridges, jowly, paunchy and endlessly magnetic, somehow contains him. Mr. Bridges not only dominates the movie, he animates it. He is heroically life-size.
''The Door in the Floor'' 
~
Early in 2001, Metallica, one of the longest-lived and most popular heavy-metal bands, went into a converted military barracks in San Francisco to begin working on a new album. The group, which had just lost its bass player, was accompanied by a therapist named Phil Towle, and also by two filmmakers, Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, who had used Metallica's music in ''Paradise Lost,'' their 1996 documentary about a murder case in Arkansas. Though the next two years were full of creative and interpersonal struggle, they yielded serendipitous results: a fierce, brooding record called ''St. Anger'' and a fascinating documentary, ''Metallica: Some Kind of Monster,'' which opens today in New York and San Francisco.
At first the idea of a rock band in therapy sounds unlikely, if not downright comical, like ''This Is Spinal Tap'' with a screenplay by Janet Malcolm. And hearing James Hetfield, Metallica's ferocious, sometimes fearsome lead singer, talking about his feelings with Lars Ulrich, the band's baby-faced drummer, can be a little jarring. But Metallica's music is rooted in strong, unruly emotions, and it has been, for many fans, a kind of therapy in its own right.
For nearly 20 years, Mr. Ulrich, Mr. Hetfield and their various band mates have channeled the basic adolescent experiences of alienation, frustration and rage into melodramatic, at times self-consciously mythic squalls of sound. One of the insights ''Some Kind of Monster'' offers is just how much work this transformation requires, perhaps especially when it is undertaken not by teenage rebels but by family men in their early 40's.
The film takes for granted that rock 'n' roll, while it remains the soundtrack of youthful disaffection, has long since become a respectable middle-aged profession. Both Mr. Ulrich and Mr. Hetfield, the band's founding members, who started playing music together in the early 1980's, are married men with young children. They also behave, with each other, like a long-married couple who find themselves bored, dissatisfied and on the rocks.
Mr. Berlinger and Mr. Sinofsky have uncovered the mysterious dynamic of their collaboration, a relationship that is, superficially, both an artistic bond and a business partnership but that is also a deep, bubbling source of identity and anxiety for each man. Mr. Towle, a bald, platitudinous fellow who has soothed the battling egos of professional sports teams, thus becomes a kind of couples therapist for Mr. Ulrich and Mr. Hetfield. They are not the only people in the room -- Kirk Hammett, the band's guitarist, and Bob Rock, the producer and acting bassist, also participate in the sessions and have their own concerns and grievances -- but the band's genius, as well as its dysfunction, seems to grow out of the tension between the drummer and the singer.
It takes a while for this central drama to take shape -- a little too long, actually. The first 30 minutes or so of ''Metallica'' have the flavor of a standard behind-the-scenes rockumentary. But soon the bad feelings rise to the surface, and by the time Mr. Hetfield disappears into rehab to conquer his drinking problem (and also, evidently, to get away from Mr. Ulrich, with whom he has no communication for six months), you realize you are witnessing a psychodrama of novelistic intricacy and epic scope.
There are a few flashbacks to earlier days of big hair and tight leather, and some necessary digressions into the band's tumultuous history, but ''Some Kind of Monster'' wisely sticks to the complications of the present tense. Mr. Hetfield's absence shifts the focus to Mr. Ulrich, who begins to seem more tormented than his partner and less inclined to admit it. When Mr. Hetfield returns, newly sober and adept at the rhetoric of recovery, Mr. Ulrich seems angrier than ever, and you wonder if the movie will ever be finished, or if the band will survive.
As it becomes clear that it will, ''Some Kind of Monster'' retreats a little into backstage business as usual: a new bassist needs to be hired, and tracks need to be polished and selected for the album, which needs a title. We are back in the world of MTV news, which may come as a relief after the long, purgatorial passage through group therapy. By the end, Mr. Towle has worn out his welcome, which may be a sign of his professional accomplishment. When Mr. Ulrich and Mr. Hetfield, at odds for so long, unite in turning against their therapist, it's hard to fight the feeling that he has it coming and that, therefore, he has done his job.
METALLICA
Some Kind of Monster
Produced and directed by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky; director of photography, Bob Richman; edited by David Zieff; released by IFC Films. Running time: 139 minutes. This film is not rated.

~
Until I saw ''Before Sunset,'' Richard Linklater's prickly, enchanting new film, I had forgotten all about June 16, 1994. I still have no memory of what I was doing on that date, but I was glad to be reminded that Jesse and Celine, a hyper-articulate young American traveler and an equally verbal French student, spent the night wandering through the streets of Vienna, chattering their way through one of the more charming and exasperating screen romances of the decade.
They concluded their tryst with the promise to meet again six months later, and when ''Before Sunrise,'' Mr. Linklater's chronicle of Jesse and Celine's long one-night stand came out, in 1995, many a couple left the theater wondering whether that next meeting ever took place.
Nine years later -- the summer of 2003 in their time, right now in ours -- those arguments will be settled, and some new ones will begin. ''Before Sunset'' reunites Jesse and Celine, still played by Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy, in a bookstore in Paris. Jesse has written a novel about their affair -- a ''tiny best seller,'' he modestly gloats -- and Paris is the last leg of his European publicity tour. Celine, who has read Jesse's book, arrives at Shakespeare & Company at the end of his reading, and they spend the next hour or so catching up, recalling their earlier encounter and also, warily, reliving it. Mr. Hawke's face has lost the last traces of its pretty, pouty softness, and Ms. Delpy's chirpy good cheer has acquired an edge of weariness, but Jesse and Celine are still as charming, and still, to everyone but each other, as exasperating as ever.
''Time is a lie,'' Jesse declares, in response to a question from one of his readers. ''It's all happening all the time.'' And ''Before Sunset,'' unfolding with deceptive languor in real time, at once supports this idea and undermines it. Erasing nearly a decade of longing and distraction, Jesse and Celine, a bit awkwardly, pick up where they left off, with a flurry of excited conversation briefly interrupted by flashbacks to their first meeting.
But of course a lot has changed, and the film is full of subliminal reminders -- the flowing waters of the Seine, the shadows that lengthen in the golden Parisian light, the implacable movement of celluloid through the projector -- that time runs in one direction, and eventually runs out. In Vienna, in their early 20's, Jesse and Celine had all the time in the world, and the hours of the night slowed down to accommodate their endless desires. Now, in their 30's, they are fighting against the clock.
Jesse has to be at the airport to catch a plane home to New York at 7:30, and the 80 minutes of ''Before Sunset'' approach this deadline with anxious leisure. But time also exerts a graver, less literal pressure on the film. In the ensuing years, Celine and Jesse have lived through some of the frustrations and satisfactions of adulthood, which emerge as they wander from bookstore to cafe, through picturesque alleys and onto the deck of a tourist boat.
None of it is terribly remarkable -- professional success, parenthood, an unhappy marriage, a series of unsatisfying relationships -- which is the point: then as now, Jesse and Celine, for all their idiosyncrasies, are meant to be perfectly ordinary citizens of the affluent, entitled West. Their experiences have left them stranded in a familiar limbo between resignation and contentment.
The questions that have nagged at them for almost a decade, and that give this modest, meandering movie an undercurrent of desperate suspense, are whether there is a chance for something more, and whether the chance was lost forever on that morning in Vienna. Were they meant to be together? And if they were, what does it mean that, until now, they have not been together?
Their memories are not entirely in synch, and it is probably best to resist the temptation to watch ''Before Sunrise'' again until after you have seen the sequel. To have a clearer recollection than they do would be unfair. At one point, Celine claims not to remember whether or not they had sex, which is a little bit shocking (especially to Jesse) but in keeping with Mr. Linklater's preference for other forms of intercourse.
It is hard to think of another English-language director with such a voracious ear for talk. More often than not, his films -- from ''Slacker'' to ''Waking Life'' -- are structured according to open-ended, syncopated rhythms of conversation.
The script of ''Before Sunset,'' which Mr. Linklater wrote with Ms. Delpy and Mr. Hawke, is both rambling and self-conscious, and at times it has the self-important sound of clever writing. But though it is sometimes maddening, the movie's prodigious verbiage is also enthralling, precisely because of its casual disregard for the usual imperatives of screenwriting.
Can't these people just get to the point, you may find yourself wondering, stealing a glance at your watch. Can't they just say what they mean? Can you? Language, after all, is not just about points and meanings. It is a medium of communication, yes, but also of avoidance, misdirection, self-protection and plain confusion, all of which are among the themes of this movie, which captures a deep truth seldom acknowledged on screen or in books: people often talk because they have nothing to say.
And sometimes you wish they would just shut up. I found myself cringing from time to time when Jesse's quick intelligence crossed the line into pretentiousness -- who does this guy think he's fooling? -- and again when Celine scrunched up her face and cooed at her pet cat. But these two were never meant to be perfectly likable; that is part of what makes them perfect for each other. In any case, they have now flirted and argued their way through two movies completely oblivious to what anyone else might think of them, and it is their indifference to the audience that makes them so fascinating.
They have no interest in us, which is why we, eavesdropping and spying on their clumsy, passionate intimacy, are so interested in them. It is also why, in the end, we are not altogether heartbroken at the prospect of saying goodbye. We never want them to leave each other -- we didn't nine years ago, and we certainly don't now -- but I, for one, was happy to leave them to each other. We'll see them again, and there will be plenty to talk about in the meantime.
''Before Sunset'' opens today in New York, Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, Washington and Toronto. It 
~
On the way out of the advance screening of ''Spider-Man 2,'' which opens tomorrow nationwide, I asked my son, who is nearly 8 and whom I had brought along for some unscientific audience research, what he thought of the movie.
As he usually does, he mentioned the scary parts and the cool parts, of which there are many. ''But there was one part,'' he said, ''that I really didn't like.'' That was when Peter Parker threw his costume in the trash and declared that he was ''Spider-Man no more.''
''He can't do that,'' my son complained. ''It's not right. We need Spider-Man.''
And so we do. At the very least, a movie audience brutalized by dumb, loud and cynical blockbusters can always stand to be reminded of what vibrant, intelligent and sincere popular filmmaking looks like. Directed by Sam Raimi from a story whose many begetters include the novelist Michael Chabon (the sole screenwriting credit belongs to Alvin Sargent, who wrote ''Ordinary People'' and ''Paper Moon''), ''Spider-Man 2'' is full of bright colors, emphatic noises and elaborate special effects. That much is to be expected.
But its distinguishing features, I'm happy to report, are strong characters and honest feelings. Like its Marvel Comics cousin ''X-Men 2,'' this sequel, freed from the dreary burden of exposition, is better than its predecessor, and also superior to most other comic-book-based movies. It has a more credible (and more frightening) villain, a more capacious and original story and a self-confidence based not only on the huge success of the first ''Spider-Man'' but also on Mr. Raimi's intuitive and enthusiastic grasp of the material.
At the end of ''Spider-Man,'' the hero was forced to choose between superhuman powers and the earthly charms of Kirsten Dunst. It was hard not to sympathize and to wonder why poor Peter Parker couldn't have both. But the world, then as now, needed Spider-Man, and so Peter (Tobey Maguire) hardened his jaw and renounced his desperate, lifelong love of Mary Jane Watson (Ms. Dunst). The first hour of the sequel is largely devoted to exploring the consequences of this decision -- to showing, in other words, what a drag it is to be Spider-Man. The weary web-slinger, though adored by the public, is mocked and maligned in The Daily Bugle (still edited by the blustery, blithely unethical J. Jonah Jameson, played with maniacal gusto by the incomparable J. K. Simmons). But the deeper wounds are suffered by his alter ego.
Peter, scrambling to balance the demands of normal life with costumed crime-fighting, is fired from his pizza-delivery gig, behind on his rent and in danger of failing his science courses at Columbia. Even worse, Peter's reputation is the negative mirror-image of Spider-Man's: he is routinely described as lazy, selfish and unreliable.
Aunt May (Rosemary Harris), still grieving from the loss of Uncle Ben (Cliff Robertson, in a brief flashback), is in danger of losing her house, and her devotion to Peter is edged with palpable disappointment. Even Mary Jane, whose career as a model and actress is beginning to take off, is fed up with what she takes to be Peter's habitual selfishness and excuses. Worst of all, she's engaged to an astronaut, who happens to be Jonah Jameson's son.
All of which leads up to that fateful moment at the movie's midpoint when Spider-Man, his webs drying up because of Peter's depression, crumples up his blue and red mask and body suit and dumps them in a back-alley garbage can. Not that his identity crisis is the only thing going on in the movie. Meanwhile, as they say in the comics, a brilliant scientist named Otto Octavius (Alfred Molina) is cooking up a dangerous and ambitious fusion project financed by Peter's best pal and Spider-Man's nemesis, Harry Osborn (James Franco). A catastrophic malfunction leaves Octavius not only a widower but also a monster, his body hauled around by malevolent mechanical legs with diabolical minds of their own.
Doc Ock, as he is known in the tabloids, is Spider-Man's enemy, but there are similarities between them. The difference is less a matter of good and evil than of servitude and free choice. Unlike Spidey, poor Ock is not the master of his powers but their servant. His humanity has been crushed by the unholy alliance of big money and technological ambition that is a persistent theme in the ''Spider-Man'' series (and in superhero comics in general).
Of course the movie itself is the product of a similar collusion, but Mr. Raimi, who cut his teeth on the gory, low-budget horror of the ''Evil Dead'' franchise, is not a slave to fancy computer-generated special effects. He uses them -- no filmmaker working in this genre today can afford not to -- but the digitized scenes of flight and fighting are the weakest parts of the movie, since Mr. Raimi does not have Peter Jackson's knack (or Steven Spielberg's) for seamlessly combining C.G.I. with more traditional moviemaking.
This minor shortcoming is overshadowed by a major virtue, which is that the extravagant action sequences are subordinate to the narrative rather than the point of the movie. The bright, inky Pop Art colors of Mr. Raimi's Marvelized New York (shot by Bill Pope and designed by Neil Spisak) provide a vivid background for what is, in the end, a touching and disarming love story, full of grief, longing and sweet confusion.
The opening credit sequence is a beautiful montage of comic-book drawings in which the only photographic image is that of Ms. Dunst. This makes sense, since it is Mary Jane, in spite of being confined to the overlapping roles of love interest, villain bait and object of rescue, who gives this superhero allegory its surprising emotional realism. Her renunciation of passivity and longing is the key to Peter's transformation into a more human superhero. This second phase of Peter Parker's coming of age is about overcoming loneliness and the need for solace and recognition as well as about selfless, heroic purpose. Of course we need Spider-Man; the revelation of ''Spider-Man 2'' is that he needs us, too.
''Spider-Man 2'' 
~
AN airline terminal is, by definition, a space you pass through on the way from one place to another, spending only as much time as is absolutely necessary. But the word terminal itself, which supplies the title for Steven Spielberg's new film opening today nationwide, also has some darker connotations that tug against its unassuming everyday meaning.
Its etymology -- termini were the local gods whose shrines served as boundary markers in the ancient Roman world -- suggests a frontier between worlds, while its modern medical usage associates the word with mortality. To be trapped indefinitely in a terminal, then, without recourse to either flight or ground transportation, can be imagined as a kind of living death, a nerve-racking state of perpetual limbo.
Which makes it all the more remarkable that Mr. Spielberg has transformed this quintessential modern nightmare of interrupted air travel into a vision of earthly paradise. The director's lyrical view of flight was evident long before ''Catch Me if You Can,'' his soulful, finger-popping evocation of the golden age of commercial aviation: it could be glimpsed in the flashing spaceship lights at the end of ''Close Encounters''; in the soaring bicycle of ''E.T.''; even in the Japanese fighter planes of ''1941'' and ''Empire of the Sun.'' (Tact forbids me from saying too much about ''Always.'') ''The Terminal,'' at once following this preoccupation to its logical conclusion and (so to speak) flying in the face of it, is, improbably and enchantingly, about the romance of being stuck on the ground.
Viktor Navorski (Tom Hanks), on a long-anticipated visit to New York from the imaginary Eastern European republic of Krakozia, arrives at J.F.K. just as a military coup abolishes his country's government and renders him effectively stateless. A complicated (and somewhat implausible) web of bureaucratic glitches and regulations strands him at the airport, where he remains for nearly a year, unable to board a flight home or hop a cab into Manhattan but innocent of anything that would warrant his detention. He is at once utterly trapped and completely at liberty. (His predicament is loosely based on the real experience of an Iranian traveler marooned for a much longer period in a Paris airport after the fall of the shah).
Mr. Spielberg and the screenwriters, Sacha Gervasi and Jeff Nathanson, emphasize freedom rather than constraint and focus on the lightness of Viktor's situation, rather than on its gravity. What sounds like a scenario out of Kafka or Gogol turns into a benign fairy tale of solidarity and resilience. The horror afflicting Victor's homeland is safely confined to cable news broadcasts on airport television monitors, and real-life traumas of loneliness and displacement melt away in the airy glass-and-steel volumes of the terminal.
The villain, since even the cheeriest fairy tale must have one, is an ambitious, humorless Homeland Security functionary named Frank Dixon, played with pursed lips and narrowed eyes by Stanley Tucci. Dixon, on the verge of a big promotion, regards Viktor not as a person in distress but as a procedural inconvenience. When his attempts to shoo Viktor into some other jurisdiction fail, his annoyance mutates into obsession, and he turns into a less sympathetic version of Hanratty, the monomanical Treasury Agent Mr. Hanks played in ''Catch Me if You Can.''
In the serene comic world of ''The Terminal,'' Dixon's vindictiveness is very much an anomaly. Before long, Viktor finds himself welcomed into an easy-going, multicultural tribe of nongovernmental airport employees, including a mischievous Indian custodian named Gupta (Kumar Pallana), a gruff baggage handler named Joe (Chi McBride) and a sweet-faced food-service worker named Enrique (Diego Luna).
In exchange for pilfered first-class meals, Viktor, with his balky English and cheery disposition, plays Cyrano for Enrique, who is smitten with Dolores (Zoë Saldana), the immigration officer who performs the daily ritual of rejecting Viktor's application for permission to enter the United States. Viktor's own romantic longings are piqued by Amelia (Catherine Zeta-Jones), a flight attendant so used to being mistreated by the married men she dates that she has forgotten how to respond to genuine kindness.
It may strike you that some of the good feeling on display in ''The Terminal'' is pretty phony. The story, at times, is thin to the point of banality, and the filmmakers seem uncomfortable with characters who manifest anything more complicated than simple, quirky goodness.
Ms. Zeta-Jones is as spirited and lovely as ever, but the movie is content to use her for her looks rather than for the arch, self-mocking wit that is her secret weapon as a comic actress. (So far, Rob Marshall in ''Chicago'' and Joe Roth in the otherwise dreary ''America's Sweethearts'' are the only directors to recognize this quality. The rest, Mr. Spielberg included, seem unnerved by the notion that a woman of such regal beauty could actually be funny.) As for Mr. Tucci, he is an obvious choice to play an officious apparatchik, but not a very inspired one; if he were a less officious actor, Dixon's coldness might carry a hint of pathos, and his malice might be psychologically interesting.
Dixon and Amelia are there to serve the plot, a mess of runny egg yolks and artificial sweeteners that Mr. Spielberg has somehow cooked into a light and pleasing soufflé. Rarely have I been so acutely aware of a movie's softness and sentimentality, and rarely have I minded less. Some of the credit surely goes to Mr. Hanks. Like Mr. Spielberg, whose mastery of the medium expresses itself in a kind of sublime playfulness, Mr. Hanks is a man with nothing left to prove. His performance is so easy and amiable that its nuances emerge only in retrospect.
At first Viktor seems like a holy fool with a funny accent, but the pouches under his eyes and the weary determination of his posture tell another story. In time we learn that Viktor is a skilled carpenter and a devoted son, but well before this information reaches us, and before he has mastered enough English to tell us so, we understand that he is resourceful and stubborn as well as generous.
There is a superficial resemblance between this character and the all-American Crusoe Mr. Hanks played in ''Cast Away,'' but Viktor arrives from Krakozia already in possession of the stoicism it took Chuck Noland more than four years on a desert island to acquire. In some ways his journey is the reverse of Chuck's. Chuck, cast out of modern consumer society, learned to make do with very little. Victor, coming from circumstances of relative privation, must adapt to a scene of surreal and prodigious abundance.
I'm guessing that Viktor's homeland, not long ago, was a socialist country, and a dogmatic old Krakozian might point out that ''The Terminal'' presents a beguiling, airbrushed fantasy of global capitalism, the true face of which is not always so benevolent. Fair enough, but another way to say this is to note that the film bathes a sterile, alienating commercial environment in the glow of utopian possibility, much as ''E.T.'' transformed a drab, half-built sprawling suburb into a realm of enchantment. In both cases the spell is cast by the desire and ingenuity of inhabitants whose surrogate and soul mate is the director himself.
The magic here is a bit more forced, perhaps because it is more urgently needed. Air travel, once a symbol of freedom and mobility, is now more often associated with frustration, anxiety and terror. Mr. Spielberg, assisted by John Williams's soft, buoyant score, the celestial glow of Janusz Kaminski's cinematography and Alex McDowell's meticulously designed set, dispels those demons with effortless grace and irresistible optimism. In ''The Terminal,'' the scary modern world simultaneously shrinks into a friendly, artificial garden of escalators and food courts and expands toward the farthest horizon of the human imagination.
''The Terminal'' 
~
''Facing Windows,'' a lush, surreally flavored immersion in voyeurism and romantic dreams, muses on many of the same themes as Alfred Hitchcock's ''Rear Window'' and ''Vertigo,'' but from a more conventional emotional perspective. This seductive Italian film uses the image of beautiful strangers secretly and obsessively studying each other through opposite windows to reflect on two related romantic quandaries: the ''grass is always greener'' and ''absence makes the heart grow fonder.''
Last year, ''Facing Windows'' swept the David di Donatello awards (Italy's Oscars) and helped establish Ferzan Ozpetek, who directed the gay-oriented cult films ''His Secret Love'' and ''Steam,'' as an international voice to be reckoned with.
Despite its surreal touches and an improbable story that piles on the metaphors, the movie, which has a rich, honey-dripping score by Andrea Guerra, maintains a tone of refined heart-tugging realism. Its bittersweet emotional mood recalls Vittorio De Sica's 1970 masterpiece, ''The Garden of the Finzi-Continis,'' whose Holocaust theme is echoed here more softly and from a much greater distance.
In the close-ups of Giovanna Mezzogiorno, who plays Giovanna, an unhappily married 29-year-old mother of two, and Raoul Bova as Lorenzo, the bachelor bank manager across the way, the camera swoons over two faces of luminous beauty and sensitivity. (The director has put spectacles on Mr. Bova, the Italian heartthrob familiar to American audiences from ''Under the Tuscan Sun,'' to give him an enigmatic Clark Kentish aura.) Despite yourself, you're lured into their mutual fantasy of a fairy-tale escape and a sensual happily-ever-after.
Instead of encasing the characters in a Hitchcockian murder mystery, the movie, written by Mr. Ozpetek with Gianni Romoli, compares the possible lovers' fantasies to an older romantic story that slowly comes into focus from clues dropped by a mysterious octogenerian (Massimo Girotti), who calls himself Simone but has otherwise lost his memory.
Slowly, the drama of Simone's youthful love affair, consisting mostly of stolen glances and impassioned notes tucked in the crevices of a statue, begins to cohere. The movie suggests that his memory of that doomed passion remains the defining, possibly life-sustaining experience of his now geriatric existence. Even in retrospect, passion thrives on mystery, distance and obstacles. And Mr. Girotti's quaking, volatile performance suggests that emotions don't evaporate in old age; they only settle into a deeper recess of the heart.
The man calling himself Simone enters Giovanna's life when her husband, Filippo (Filippo Nigro), a sometime auto mechanic reduced to working night shifts pumping gas, takes pity on him and brings him into their home after he is found wandering the streets looking for help. Filippo's impulsive charity becomes the latest bone of contention in the couple's frayed nine-year marriage. Giovanna, who dreams of being a pastry chef, loathes her work as an accountant in a poultry factory and angrily harangues Filippo for not being able to hold a job for long.
An introductory flashback, set in 1943 and fleshed out only at the end, shows the youthful Simone (Massimo Poggio) working in a dingy bakery. Unexpectedly assaulted by his boss, Simone grabs a knife, stabs his assailant and flees panic-stricken into the streets.
Six decades later, the handsome boy has deteriorated into an addled, muttering old man subject to fits of paranoia and weeping. As he dodders along the streets of Rome, his mind plays tricks, and the scene ricochets between the 1940's and today. Once his true identity is determined (it would be giving away too much to say any more), he emerges as the movie's resident sage, a flawed hero who, after regaining some of his memory, lectures Giovanna. ''Don't be content to survive!'' he advises in a tone of trembling agitation. ''You must demand to live in a better world, not just dream about it!''
When Giovanna first meets Lorenzo, the spark between them is palpable. But they remain circumspect as together they piece together clues -- a concentration camp number tattooed on Simone's arm, a pocket full of gems and an impassioned letter found on his clothing -- as to his true identity. Gradually, the two unfinished love stories, one six decades old, the other just taking shape, begin to merge.
''Facing Windows,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is full of small, incisive touches, including the hardheaded comments of Eminè (Serra Yilmaz), Giovanna's busybody neighbor and co-worker at the chicken factory. The vicious fights between Giovanna and Filippo unleash the pent-up frustration of two people impulsively blaming each other for everything that's wrong in their lives.
The movie's most haunting moment lasts only a few seconds. Breaking away from the besotted Lorenzo, who is almost sobbing with joy now that his dream lover has materialized in his apartment, Giovanna goes to the window through which he's been studying her, and gazes across the way. What she discovers in a hallucinatory revelation is the image of herself gazing back.
''Facing Windows'' 
~
''What do you see? A shapeless old lump.''
Those words are the withering self-assessment of May (Anne Reid), a recently widowed grandmother, as she nervously undresses for the first time in front of her daughter's hunky boyfriend, Darren (Daniel Craig), in ''The Mother.'' Giddy with a sense of renewal after years of caring for her husband, May, in a reckless moment, has propositioned Darren, and he has graciously accepted. As they lie side by side in the spare room of her daughter's house, May, her voice breaking, confesses, ''I thought that nobody would ever touch me again, apart from the undertaker.''
The sight of a dilapidated woman in her late 60's besotted with a careless young god in his mid-30's may be uncomfortably taboo-busting. But ''The Mother,'' an extraordinarily clear-sighted and psychologically balanced British drama, stares as calmly at May's perilous leap into churning emotional rapids as a medical show does when keeping its gaze fixed on a tricky surgical procedure.
The bravery of Ms. Reid's screen performance can be measured by her utter lack of self-consciousness when naked before the camera. When desire trumps May's maternal feelings, and she knowingly (and guiltily) risks exile from her family to pursue a hopeless infatuation, she is achingly believable. And Mr. Craig brings the same undertone of volatile macho arrogance seething below a cultivated surface that he brought to the role of the poet Ted Hughes in ''Sylvia.''
''The Mother,'' directed by Roger Michell, is a far better film than either ''Changing Lanes'' or ''Notting Hill,'' his two best-known movies. The screenwriter Hanif Kureishi's even-handed view of the characters' frustrations and fantasies is infused with an unwavering Chekhovian compassion. Neither good nor evil, the characters are complicated, ordinary people coping as best they can with their emotional wounds and fear of the future, grabbing whatever zest they can drag into their lives, even while suspecting that the most passion can bring is a quick, temporary fix.
''The Mother,'' which opens in New York today, suggests how far we've traveled from the sexual romanticism of ''Lady Chatterley's Lover'' in portraying the redemptive power of Eros. Transcendent sex doesn't last that long, and Darren is no primal life force watering the parched desert of propriety and repression with his godlike sensuality.
An old friend of May's grown-up son, Bobby (Steven Mackintosh), Darren is an unhappily married builder and anguished father of an autistic boy, working on an addition to Bobby's house. His tempestuous relationship with Bobby's sister, Paula (Cathryn Bradshaw), who wants him to leave his wife for her and threatens to end the relationship when he balks, is a pitched battle whose highs are matched by its violent lows.
Darren's animal magnetism coincides with a seductive streak of empathy, and his affair with May grows out of a tender friendship that develops after Paula entreats her mother to serve as a go-between with Darren and report back to her about his feelings. But after a line of cocaine and a couple of drinks, Darren curdles into a menacing brute who explodes with frustration at his trapped circumstances and relative poverty.
With three major characters on its plate -- May, Darren and Paula -- the movie has more than its share of conflicts to juggle. Looking back on her life as a bored, uncomplaining housewife, May is aghast to realize the emptiness of those years, when her children assumed that she was fulfilled by her dreary routine. Having seen her husband to his grave, she seeks the companionship of her children only to discover that they don't want her around. Paula, an aspiring novelist who teaches a writing class, bitterly accuses May of never valuing her or encouraging her in anything. Bobby is too busy pursuing risky business ventures to give his mother more than the polite time of day.
The screenplay bluntly faces anxieties of aging that are rarely voiced in the movies, and it is too hard-headed to offer comfy palliatives. As Bruce (Oliver Ford Davies), an older man in Paula's writing class who collects china and aggressively pursues May, puts it: ''I can feel the world streaming by me, incomprehensibly. I feel left out. I feel stupid.''
May, free to be a self-determining adult for the first time in her life, faces a void that may be impossible to fill. As she puts it, ''I'm not ready for old age.''
''The Mother'' 
~
You would expect a movie called ''Coffee and Cigarettes'' to be leisurely, even indolent. To grab a smoke or a cup of coffee, after all, is the preferred way to take a break -- from work, from the stressful routines of ordinary life, from the rush of indistinguishable moments that make up our days. Or at least it used to be, before we starting sipping our lattes on the run out of cardboard cups and before smoking changed from an indoor, social vice into a furtive, solitary sidewalk indulgence.
Shot in black-and-white, as if to give the plumes of smoke and wisps of steam their full cinematic effect, Jim Jarmusch's charming new film, his first since ''Ghost Dog,'' has an unmistakably nostalgic, even elegiac feel. With one exception, the coffee in this series of 11 brief, discursive vignettes is drunk the way it used to be, from serious porcelain mugs, and butts are extinguished in ashtrays made of cut glass or hard plastic.
''Coffee and Cigarettes,'' which Mr. Jarmusch made over 17 years, often during breaks from other projects, is an anthology of conversations, most among famous or semifamous people, who play themselves -- sometimes, sort of. Bill Murray, for example, shows up moonlighting as a waiter, recognized for who he is by his only customers, RZA and GZA of the Wu-Tang Clan. Cate Blanchett appears in all her glossy, blond movie-star radiance playing herself, and also, thanks to some unassumingly tricky camera work, her wayward and resentful cousin, who is a brunette. Like Mr. Murray, Steve Buscemi is waiting on tables, spilling bad coffee on Joie and Cinqué Lee (whose more famous brother, Spike, is mentioned in a later vignette).
Some of the episodes are slight and anecdotal. Jack and Meg White of the White Stripes discuss the physics of the Tesla coil; Steven Wright and Roberto Benigni talk past each other before one of them goes off to a dental appointment. Others have the compact density of good short stories. The cumulative effect is a relaxed, ruminative buzz.
Not that the people on screen are necessarily at ease, with themselves or with one another. There is some loose, riffing coffee talk (notably between Mr. Murray and his herbal-tea-drinking patrons), but most of these brief encounters have a prickly, nervous energy. Under the influence of nicotine and caffeine, and with too much time on their hands, people have a way of getting on one another's nerves. You might think that a meeting between Iggy Pop and Tom Waits would be a kind of summit of uncompromising cool, but in each other's company those musicians turn defensive and passiveaggressive. Even in the most casual exchanges, hidden agendas and unspoken tensions percolate beneath the surface. Mr. Buscemi's idle chatter, and the Lees' response to it, send up a ripple of racial hostility. Two old friends (Isaach de Bankolé and Alex Descas) talk in circles around some unnamed emotional distress before saying their inconclusive and sad goodbyes.
In the two strongest chapters -- the one featuring Ms. Blanchett and another in which Steve Coogan and Alfred Molina play a deft game of celebrity one-upmanship -- such vague discomforts blossom into one-act dramas of envy and suspicion. But the full richness of ''Coffee and Cigarettes,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, can't really be isolated in any single moment or performance, though Mr. Coogan's self-mocking turn is a repellent tour de force.
This movie, which is full of great music, from Mahler to the Skatalites, much of it wafting in from restaurant jukeboxes, has the serendipitous coherence of an old LP. Some of the tracks are stronger than others, but the magic lies in the echoes and unexpected harmonies between the selections. Snatches of conversation and stray thoughts recur like musical motifs, as if the characters were plucking them out of a common ether of insights and ideas. According to one of these (attributed to the physicist Nikola Tesla) the entire world is a kind of instrument, a ''transmitter of acoustical resonances.'' It's a lovely notion, and the implication that beauty and meaning can be found in odd places at unlikely, idle moments resonates through this lovely film.
''Coffee and Cigarettes'' 
~
''Ella Enchanted,'' a funny takeoff on the ancient conventions of fairy tales, might be thought of as a live-action version of ''Shrek,'' the computer-animated hit of 2001 that blended a Brothers Grimm setting with characters and values drawn from contemporary shopping-mall culture. But as directed with verve by Tommy O'Haver (''Billy's Hollywood Screen Kiss''), ''Ella Enchanted'' is already so heavy with computer-generated effects that calling it live-action is to stretch the point.
Unquestionably live is Anne Hathaway, the 21-year-old actress who starred in ''The Princess Diaries'' in 2001 (and is due back in August in the sequel, ''Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement'').
Ms. Hathaway is an appealingly gangly, dark-eyed beauty with a streak of natural vivacity that recalls 1940's actresses like Ann Sheridan and Linda Darnell.
In ''Ella,'' which opens today nationwide, she plays the title character, a put-upon teenager in a storybook world. Her widowed father (Patrick Bergin) has injudiciously married Dame Olga (Joanna Lumley, of ''Absolutely Fabulous''), the mother of all wicked stepmothers. She comes complete with a pair of entertainingly hateful daughters (Lucy Punch and Jennifer Higham), who like nothing better than torturing Ella, particularly once they discover that, thanks to a questionable gift bestowed by a fairy (Vivica Fox), she is unable to refuse any order she is given, from patting her head and rubbing her stomach to handing over the precious necklace that was her mother's gift to her.
The wicked stepsisters are obsessed with the hunky Prince Charmont (Hugh Dancy), heir apparent to the throne occupied by his evil uncle, Prince Regent Edgar (Cary Elwes, providing a link to another fairy-tale spoof, ''The Princess Bride'' of 1987, in which he starred). But Prince Char, as he is known to readers of Medieval Teen magazine, only has eyes for Ella from the moment their paths fortuitously cross.
As Ella sets out to find the errant fairy and convince her to revoke her dubious present, the screenwriters -- Laurie Craig, Karen McCullah Lutz, Kirsten Smith, Jennifer Heath and Michele J. Wolff (working from a novel by Gail Carson Levine) -- take her through various effects-filled realms, including a land where elves are forced by the evil regent to sing, dance and be relentlessly merry, and a forced-labor compound for giants that looks disturbingly like a concentration camp.
Mr. O'Haver gives the political subtext a forceful treatment but does not pat himself on the back for it. The messages blend seamlessly into the fantasy and comedy in what is surely one of the best films for older children in quite some time.
''Ella Enchanted'' 
~
Mike Mignola's ''Hellboy'' comics have a drizzly, musty gothic ambience -- the same fetid air that H. P. Lovecraft circulated in his fiction. The writer and director Guillermo del Toro has brought a similar woozy, disconcerting melancholy to his film adaptation, and his obvious affection and affinity for that dankness alone would make ''Hellboy'' worth seeing. But Mr. del Toro lets loose with an all-American, vaudevillian rambunctiousness that makes the movie daffy, loose and lovable.
For Mr. del Toro, this is hard-core. He turned down a shot at directing the third ''Harry Potter'' film because he nurtured a need to bring Mr. Mignola's colossal, monstrous-looking, Twizzler-colored champion to the screen. The director's determination pays off, mostly, as a dreamy mating of filmmaker, craft and material.
He also multiplied what Mr. Mignola (and John Byrne, who wrote the script of the comic series ''Seed of Destruction,'' from which the movie comes) envisioned by casting Ron Perlman in the lead, an actor whose unruffled, seedy dynamism gives Hellboy a raffish soulfulness. Mr. del Toro's concentration and visible love of the material and Mr. Perlman's witty and intuitive performance keep the movie afloat when the action sequences threaten to make it routine. Mr. Perlman enriches the film with emotional complication, giving Hellboy's vanity a piquancy. This devilish beast files down the horns on his head and has the swagger of a hipster mutant who takes pleasure in swatting down evil and exhaling plumes of smoke from a constant stream of cigars.
The story is pretty complicated. During World War II, Hitler, apparently anticipating story elements of ''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' sends a special squad led by Grigori Rasputin (Karel Roden), the mad, mad monk, to rend the interdimensional barriers and obtain a creature that will give the edge to the Nazis. Given that the Nazis' black-magic squad has the unkillable Kroenen (Ladislav Beran) slicing through the Allies with a pair of gleaming retractable blades, you have to ask how much more of an edge does the Third Reich need? (If Hitler had access to just one of the superassassins assigned to him in the movies, we'd be living in a very different world today.)
Rasputin accomplishes his otherworldly task with a whirling device that sends blue-white bolts through the countryside and also looks like the logo of one of the film's financiers, Revolution Studios. Rasputin's conjuring leads to the emergence of an infant creature, red as sin, with a long tail, who falls into the hands of the Allies. The kindly British scientist Dr. Broom (John Hurt) tames the tiny scarlet devil with a Baby Ruth the size of a bazooka. Adopted by Dr. Broom, Hellboy, with his huge, stonelike left arm, becomes the go-to guy for the good doctor and the antiapparition league known as the Bureau for Paranormal Research and Defense.
The movie shifts to the modern day, when that bureau is run by the snarling Tom Manning (Jeffrey Tambor), who's growing tired of coming up with lies to hide Hellboy's existence. He's charged with maintaining both Hellboy, who consumes mass quantities of food and beer, and the sensitive psychic Abe Sapien (Doug Jones), the water-dweller with the flesh of a trout (and a sonorous voice supplied by David Hyde Pierce). A new agent is assigned to baby-sit the pair, the nervous John Myers (Rupert Evans).
And when Rasputin and his ageless Nazi love, the she-wolf Ilsa (Bridget Hodson), let loose another dangerous force on the world, the lizardlike Sammael (Brian Steele), the situation requires the reactivation of a bureau agent, Liz (Selma Blair). Liz has pyro-telekinetic abilities she can barely control, not to mention another fiery-red power she cannot contain: Hellboy, whose crush on her is as mountainous as his appetite. (Ms. Blair's heavy-lidded eyes seem to be at half mast from some lovely lewd fantasy. With her sleepy carnality and dry, hesitant timing, she is a superb foil for Mr. Perlman's plain-spoken bravado. If you look like Hellboy, why hide anything?)
When Agent Myers, a mere mortal, gets into the middle of things, he seems to be a greater immediate threat than the immortal Sammael, who is reborn as two separate Sammaels every time he's killed. There's also a greater imminent threat: the destiny that Rasputin hints for Hellboy.
It's tough to bring a comic-book character to movie life because the incestuous homage that comics pay to one another is so prevalent. The ragtag group of unwanted, neurotic heroes feels like the X-Men, and the seat of evil that Rasputin and his team occupy has been seen in a thousand B pictures. Without the idiosyncratic boldness that the original artists convey on the page -- like Mr. Mignola's art, with its Expressionist woodcut cartoonishness -- comics-based movies often only echo what's come before in narrative terms.
What distinguishes ''Hellboy'' from the pack and gives it squirmy, ferocious life is the environment that Mr. del Toro creates on screen. The movie is lubricated with a fluid, slimy menace, and the director's love of rotted, desiccated flesh and exposed, traumatized organs adds an engrossing grossness. But a contrasting vulnerability has also been slipped in, a critical addition. When Abe Sapien goes off to investigate a Sammael appearance, there's a mounting awareness of how ill suited he is to an encounter with this slavering hybrid.
And the jealous Hellboy, stalking Myers and Liz on a date, vaults from rooftop to rooftop and ends up chatting about life and love with a 9-year-old boy from whom he filches cookies and milk. And when Manning and Hellboy's gruffness come nose to nose, the tension between them melts when Manning gives his charge a paternal and accurate lecture on how to light a cigar properly.
Mr. del Toro avidly lavishes this texture on ''Hellboy,'' which opens nationwide today, giving it a kiss of distinction. It's an elegant haunted house of a picture with dread and yearning part of the eeriness. Mr. Perlman's mastery of bad-tempered volubility makes ''Hellboy'' a kind of screwball-comedy version of the Thing from the ''Fantastic Four'' comics. Like any American comedy protagonist, he's always trying to explain himself and do what's right. That ambition is what gets him into trouble and is the truest definition of hell.
''Hellboy'' 
~
''Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter . . . and Spring'' is an exquisitely simple movie. Written and directed by Kim Ki Duk, it was filmed at a single location -- a remote and picturesque mountain lake in a South Korean wilderness preserve -- and it concentrates on the relationship between a Buddhist monk and his young protégé, characters whose names are never spoken. But like Blake's ''Songs of Innocence and Experience,'' the film's lyrical plainness is the sign of a profound and sophisticated artistic sensibility. In five sharp, concise vignettes that correspond to the seasons of the title, Mr. Kim manages to isolate something essential about human nature and at the same time, even more astonishingly, to comprehend the scope of human experience.
The subject of ''Spring'' is spiritual discipline, which the older monk distills into a set of lessons that are, like the film, self-evident and enigmatic. They also reflect aspects of Buddhism not always sufficiently appreciated in the West, often witty and occasionally harsh.
In the first chapter the child monk, indulging a boyish taste for cruelty to animals, ties rocks around the bodies of a fish, a frog and a snake and laughs as they struggle to move. That night the older monk ties a stone to the boy, saying he will remove it when the animals are free. There is an element of slapstick in this punishment, as well as a severe and uncompromising notion of responsibility. If any of the animals have died, the teacher tells his pupil, ''you will carry this stone in your heart for the rest of your life.''
Animals figure in other chapters: a cat's tail is used as a calligraphy brush, and there is a quizzical rooster and a deadpan turtle. They are emblems of the natural world, Aesopian metaphors offering silent commentary on the foibles of humanity.
The master and his protégé live in extreme isolation; their small wooden house, on a raft in the middle of the lake, is the only habitation for miles around. But emissaries from the outside world occasionally reach them. In ''Summer'' they are joined by a young woman seeking treatment for an unspecified disease. (The style of her clothes is one of the few indications that the film takes place in modern times.) She and the younger monk, who since ''Spring'' has become a man, slip into a love affair that marks his fall from innocence into experience. ''Lust,'' his tolerant mentor warns, ''awakens the desire to possess, which ends in the intent to murder.''
When the mentor is proved right in ''Autumn,'' the proof may at first seem melodramatic and literal minded. For all its hushed, philosophical mood, Mr. Kim's film, which will be shown tonight and tomorrow at the New Directors/New Films series before opening commercially on Friday, has moments of intense, theatrical feeling. To illustrate the ideals of harmony and peace, a certain amount of discord and dissonance must be endured. The music sometimes tests the limits of such endurance; it sounds better suited to accompany the sinking of the Titanic than the progress of the monk's creaky rowboat.
But the story, effortlessly joining the cycle of the seasons to the larger rhythms of the life cycle, has a beguiling perfection. Along the way there are numerous surprises, and you are never sure, as one chapter gives way to the next, how many changes will have taken place. But by the end -- when you are back at spring, with a young acolyte and a gray-haired master -- the film takes on the heft and gravity of one of the smooth stone Buddhas that decorate the old monk's house. It seems less a modern work of art than a solid, ancient object that has always been there, waiting to be found.
SPRING, SUMMER, FALL, WINTER . . . AND SPRING
Written (in Korean, with English subtitles), edited and directed by Kim Ki Duk; director of photography, Baek Dong Hyun; music by Bark Ji Woong; art director, Oh Sang Man; produced by Lee Seung Jae; released by Sony Pictures Classics. Running time: 103 minutes. This film 
~
With his compulsively slamming lyrics and king-of-the-world delivery, DMX intuitively echoes the existentialism of the projects of the novelist Donald Goines. He's the perfect actor for the stylized and often satisfying film adaptation of Goines's ''Never Die Alone,'' directed with street-corner majesty by the cinematographer-turned-director Ernest Dickerson.
DMX stars as a drug dealer, King David, who pops up in the streets again after a long absence. Rolling into the frame in a player's classic -- a late 70's Stutz Blackhawk -- King David shrugs his way back into the hard-knock life. He quickly reaps what he sows and, mortally wounded, passes all his worldly goods to Paul (David Arquette), a scrambling, white, would-be writer. As the blood drains from his body, King David croaks a plea for company -- invoking the film's title -- to the stunned Paul. Mr. Dickerson treats this like facts jotted on a police report.
King David's estate includes an audio journal of his life, which provides flashbacks and a narrative-within-a-narrative that answers the shaken Paul's curiosity.
The highlights of King David's high life propel ''Never Die Alone.'' The drug dealer's remorseless march into doom animates the bleary-eyed Detroit-based crime stories pounded out by Goines. His novels sizzled as if he were addicted to the hit of adrenaline he absorbed from chronicling the miscreant behavior he witnessed, lived and served time for. It would be hard to capture the late 60's antagonism and trick-bag, gangsters' paradise mythology that he spun into a series of battering-ram novels that splintered the genre. Though only one of his books, ''Crime Partners,'' was previously -- and appallingly -- filmed, the hoods-in-the-'hoods movies of the early 90's derived from a Goines template, like Mr. Dickerson's directorial debut, ''Juice.'' The bar scenes in ''Juice,'' full of bitter aimlessness, prefigure ''Never Die Alone'' with a similar comic starkness. The directors Allen and Albert Hughes inserted shards of Goines's sensibility into their films ''Menace II Society'' and, less successfully, ''Dead Presidents.'' The ''Presidents''' trailer looks like a coming-attractions reel for the greatest Goines adaptation never made.
The writer was a folk hero in Detroit, where I grew up consuming his bleak ghetto tales -- stories warmed by pungent adjectives that acted as space heaters in abandoned buildings. Goines's influence was his writing stablemate Iceberg Slim -- both came out of Holloway House, the pulp-fusion Troma Studios of publishing. Sadly, the junkie novelist Goines died at 37 in 1974 during a drug-related murder; his own life would make a great movie.
Like all of Goines's heroes, King David is a scourge on the periphery, and the movie dramatizes his corrosive effect on the margins with savvy muscularity. Every life he touches he leaves in ruins -- a need to deface beauty as a result of self-loathing is implicit, and DMX signs that motivation with sly hostility.
To say that King David is the best role he's ever had is an understatement. Until now, he never seemed to feel the need to inhabit a movie in this way. He's committed himself to the displays of King David's cagey brutality, chalking up every slight as an act to be avenged. His blithely satisfied voice-overs drip with chuckling, kingpin condescension. This unrepentant embodiment of thug life debases two women -- a white actress (Jennifer Sky) and a black, upwardly mobile college girl (Reagan Gomez-Preston) -- for sheer, petty sport, and acknowledges his own ugliness as he does so.
It's a tricky gamble to make a movie about such a slug, and although ''Never Die Alone,'' which opens nationwide today, doesn't glamorize his behavior, neither does it assume that viewers need to have disapproval of the protagonist explicitly stated. DMX's sullen magnificence is a plus, and the fated King David is tailored so perfectly to his environs that the unsophisticated -- that is, young people -- may think of the character as heroic, because of his audience rapport.
Goines's pimped-out plots gleam like custom rims on an Escalade. Part of the rationale for his characters' exploitative behavior was linked to an option package that rationalized, in 60's terms, the racial divide sucking African-Americans into a downward spiral. The movie suffers a bit without this context, since Goines's feelings on race in America pervade his fiction. His outlook was similar to a recent Chris Rock statement on the subject: ''If you're black, you gotta look at America a little bit different. You gotta look at America like the uncle who paid for you to go to college but molested you.''
Instead, the screenwriter James Gibson decided to subtract the knowing-victim ethos that Goines used as subtext. This approach is probably what attracted DMX to the material, and why the sections of ''Never Die Alone'' centering on King David have a steely allure. The portions of the movie dealing with Paul are self-pitying, and a scene in which his black girlfriend upbraids him for his off-white fascination with urban danger feels more like comic relief than character definition. Mr. Arquette's performance is weakened by playing his reactions with sweaty, pallid awe.
The scenes with Blue (Antwon Tanner), the drug overlord who leads life as if he's seen too many Big Daddy Kane videos, are fatalistic comedy. Blue's factotum, Mike (Michael Ealy), who dispatched David, turns out to be the most tarnished figure of all -- the most psychologically disfigured character in the movie. Mr. Ealy keeps the pain closeted; it's only late in the game that the origins of Mike's rage are fully revealed.
''Never Die Alone'' may be one of the first films photographed by someone -- in this case, Matthew Libatique -- who was obviously influenced by Mr. Dickerson's groundbreaking cinematography. Mr. Libatique's furious, high-contrast diffusion shows more than mere technique. It's the glossy, shiny purview of King David, the protagonist's perspective turned into a visual motif, elevating the look from a mere reiteration of music video fare. As a cinematographer, Mr. Dickerson used psychological underpinnings to create a palette for the movies he shot -- among them several for Spike Lee, including ''She's Gotta Have It'' and ''Malcolm X.'' As director, he employs Mr. Libatique for the same complement.
''Never Die Alone'' is primarily a riveting genre film that neatly exhibits the director's growing assurance -- Donald Goines would be proud.
''Never Die Alone'' 
~
Often, when Jim Carrey plays it straight, all of the vitality is drained from his face; he looks like a root- canal patient trying out a pleasant expression for his oral surgeon. In Michel Gondry's ''Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind'' -- a title that will frustrate ushers trying to abbreviate it for marquees -- Mr. Carrey finally understands that he needn't cut a character off from pleasure, and so his Joel Barish is serious rather than anestheticized. But this angular and intelligent romantic comedy isn't entirely consistent. Even as you laugh, it's a movie you admire more than love.
Mr. Gondry, displaying an impressively quicksilver, scrambling technique, doesn't exactly seem to be listening to his actors. You can almost hear him shouting at the gathered crowds just outside the camera frame. It helps that he is working with a much better script than he had for ''Human Nature,'' his previous collaboration with the screenwriter Charlie Kaufman. Mr. Kaufman has spent more time cataloging -- and sending up -- American bourgeois pettiness and immaturity than any screenwriter going.
One of the funniest things about Mr. Kaufman is that all of his filmed scripts -- ''Being John Malkovich,'' ''Human Nature,'' ''Adaptation'' and now ''Sunshine'' -- sound like titles from REM's ''Reckoning.'' (The title actually comes from a poem by Alexander Pope -- or as one of the characters calls him, ''Pope Alexander.'')
The mournful, paranoid quality of ''Eternal Sunshine,'' which opens nationwide today, especially brings to mind REM's ''South Central Rain'': ''The city on the river, there's a girl without a dream,'' which turns out to be literally true later in this film for Clem (Kate Winslet). Clem is the brash, loquacious bookstore employee who meets Joel (Mr. Carrey) as he wanders the streets alone on Valentine's Day -- a self-consciously poignant conceit if ever there was one. The two of them fall in love under a glum, flannel cloud cover that could use some eternal sunshine.
With her streaks of cobalt-blue hair, Clem has the look of one of those Barnes & Noble information-counter girls whose eyes haze over with contempt if you aren't asking for help finding Thomas Pynchon -- or Charlie Kaufman. Ms. Winslet precisely limns the neurotic assertiveness that makes someone like Clem seem less attractive every time she opens her mouth, yet she also projects the charm of someone who needs to be heard.
Mr. Gondry and the superlative cinematographer Ellen Kuras mock the title by setting the film in a wintry suburban New York and using as many available light sources as possible. A shot of Joel and Clem flat on their backs on a frozen lake is an awe-inspiring piece of visual magic, both romantic and conceptual; they'd both like to freeze the moment. It also captures the differences between the two; Clem had to coerce Joel out of his shell, and he doesn't bother to cloak his resentment until he joins her.
Joel's growing infatuation with Clem is bruised when he finds that she's had all memories of him erased from her mind. Devastated, he goes to the inventor of the process, Dr. Mierzwiak (Tom Wilkinson), for the same treatment. When the heart-sick Joel asks if the procedure causes brain damage, Dr. Mierzwiak replies, ''Technically, it is brain damage.''
Mr. Kaufman sets much of the film's second half at Joel's apartment, where the technicians Stan (Mark Ruffalo) and Patrick (Elijah Wood) are giving Joel's mind a Clem-bake, eliminating all traces of her.
The inspiration for ''Sunshine,'' seems to be Harold Ramis's ''Groundhog Day,'' which -- like any great movie -- gains in stature as time passes. Where Bill Murray dominated that film -- and its accomplishment seemed overshadowed because he bestrode the picture like a giant -- ''Sunshine'' is filled with a group of outsize selfish folks whose minor-league brattiness makes the second half of the film funny and ugly.
Stan obviously doesn't have respect for professionalism; he trashes Joel's apartment when his co-worker, May (Kirsten Dunst), joins him. Patrick falls for Clem while dry-cleaning Joel's memories, and takes advantage of his position.
Joel, slightly cognizant of the intruders in his home while he's under, experiences the waking nightmare we've all had, dreaming of the room we've dozed off in and trying to rouse ourselves from sleep. In the meantime, the heartache-cleansing process is stealing away all of his beloved -- and painful -- times with Clem.
This entire section is breathtakingly realized, melting several bad dreams into one, and Mr. Gondry's swift, improvised direction bleaches the portentousness from the conception.
It succeeds so completely that we understand why the director's music videos -- especially his work with Bjork and the White Stripes -- work so well. He can define contradictory emotions with extraordinary clarity and alacrity. It's why he's so suited to handling much of this particular Kaufman script.
But when it comes to getting a single point across in ''Sunshine,'' he's at a loss. Mr. Gondry's witty direction allows the movie to gloss over the fact that this psychological erasure is treated as a given, instead of establishing a social context for accepting the operation -- a major fault.
Dr. Mierzwiak is the only functioning grown-up in the picture and later even he is discovered to have feet of clay. Then again, ''Sunshine'' is a feat of clay, with Mr. Kaufman consistently -- almost compulsively -- handling and reshaping the material, while dropping clues in the opening that all is not what it seems. A key is Joel's stuttering on the word ''remember.'' Mr. Kaufman has conjured the film equivalent of a Philip K. Dick Hallmark card.
The movie has all of the trademarks of a Kaufman script, including hidden recesses of the mind and personality exposed and, most important, a nerdy, socially inept protagonist -- for this scenarist, qualifications for the red badge of courage.
This results in Joel's being the least developed character in the film. Mr. Carrey lugs the picture around on his lachrymal ducts, tear traces nearly burning permanent furrows in his cheeks.
Clem's amorous bullying aside, she's right about Joel. Part of his personality is as lint-gray as the skies in the movie. Dolorous self-pity isn't particularly attractive, though Mr. Carrey doesn't descend into the bathetic.
Joel often appears nondescript, and Mr. Carrey puts in enough understated effort that the lack of delineation almost doesn't register -- a stylized way of compensating for a deficit. He does get to show some aplomb in the final scene, when Joel acts out the most mature sentiment ever found in a Kaufman script, that having one's psyche purged isn't necessarily a good thing.
What becomes of the broken-hearted, after the conversation has dimmed, is that they get over it. And by concluding with an adult realization, ''Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind'' ultimately lets sunlight peek through the gloom, in more ways than one.
''Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind'' 
~
If an award were given to a movie for skillful crowd control, ''Bon Voyage,'' a rich, teeming French farce set in and around Bordeaux in 1940 on the eve of the German occupation of Paris, would be a leading contender. The delightful, bustling film, directed by Jean-Paul Rappeneau (''Cyrano de Bergerac,'' ''The Horseman on the Roof''), is a triumph of narrative ingenuity that juggles myriad characters in various states of panicked self-absorption at a turning point in history.
Movie stars, spies, government ministers and jailbirds collide in a panoramic gridlock when the advancing German army threatens Paris and the city's upper crust flees en masse to the Hotel Splendide in Bordeaux, where all jockey frantically for reservations. Amid the shouting, jostling and dashing around, everyone's role in this nostalgic homage to 1940's war movies remains comprehensible.
The film, which opens today in Manhattan, blurs the line between comedy and epic drama so adroitly that the two styles fuse into something quite original: a lyrical farce that pays homage to its period in any number of ways. The film's proposal that chaos and farce may often be synonymous is its cleverest conceptual stroke. In its portrayal of mass confusion, in which people's best and worst instincts all flare up at once, farce and melodrama fuse into an exhilarating larger-than-life human comedy that in its zeal to entertain refrains from making heavy moral judgments.
The movie's most lyrical strand is a lush, dramatic score by Gabriel Yared, whose gorgeous music for ''The English Patient'' was critical to that movie's success. Here the score elevates the characters' silly romantic shenanigans just enough to lend them a gloss of pathos and add an extra layer of glamour to the film's already sensuous texture.
At the heart of those shenanigans, with puppet strings in hand, reigns Viviane (Isabelle Adjani), a spoiled, pouting movie star who thinks nothing of reducing her distinguished suitors to panting little puppies doing stunts at her command. As ''Bon Voyage'' opens, Viviane's latest movie has made her the toast of Paris, and her clout is unassailable.
The key to Viviane's manipulation of her once and future lovers is her absolute belief in her mystique. The more influential her beaus, the more they feel entitled to the luxury of groveling at her feet and demonstrating their devotion in reckless ways. Ms. Adjani, in a hairstyle (or wig) that makes her look like Loretta Young (the amazingly youthful Ms. Adjani is 48 but still looks 24), hams up her role just enough to balance the farcical and romantic elements of her character's foolish existence.
Among her follies, she persuades an ex-boyfriend, an aspiring writer named Frédéric (Grégori Derangère), to take the rap for a murder she commits on the night of her premiere. She also extracts favors from Beaufort (Gérard Depardieu), the besieged collaborationist government minister who becomes her protector. At the same time, she is avidly pursued by Winckler (Peter Coyote), a journalist who may also be a German spy. Viviane eventually gets her comeuppance, but it's a comparatively gentle one that cinches her status as uncrowned royalty.
A major subplot involves the desperate attempts by Kopolski (Jean-Marc Stehlé), a distinguished scientist, and his devoted young assistant, Camille (Virginie Ledoyen), to prevent a cache of heavy water (for the making of the atomic bomb) from falling into German hands by transporting it to England. This plot, which also involves a slowly budding romance between Frédéric and Camille, has obvious allusions to ''Casablanca,'' and any resemblance between Ms. Ledoyen and the young Ingrid Bergman seems entirely intentional.
Because it's too much in love with its own nostalgic vision to take any moral risks, ''Bon Voyage'' is finally not a great movie. But if you're looking for a lavish wallow in Gallic wartime nostalgia, it is great fun.
''Bon Voyage'' 
~
The new Adam Sandler movie ''50 First Dates,'' a philosophical brain-damage romantic comedy that also stars Drew Barrymore -- but wait. Don't turn the page. This review is not going where you think it's going, because neither, thank goodness, is the movie.
It starts out looking very much like another of Mr. Sandler's infantile exercises in id gratification. First, a montage of anonymous women appears on screen to marvel at the sexual prowess of one Henry Roth, who is not the legendary author of ''Call It Sleep'' but rather a Maui veterinarian with a special interest in marine mammals and, off the job, in short-term romances with vacationing mainlanders. Once we meet Henry (Mr. Sandler), we are treated to a joke involving bruised testicles, a gag in which a walrus vomits all over Henry's sexually ambiguous Russian assistant. There is also Mr. Sandler's fellow ''Saturday Night Live'' alumnus Rob Schneider, who plays a goofy Hawaiian stoner named Ula.
Luckily, the subject of this film, directed by Peter Segal from a script by George Wing, is short-term amnesia, which should help you forget its first abysmal minutes. As soon as Ms. Barrymore shows up, the forces of coarseness and idiocy surrender before her bright, soft smile and sly good humor -- a rout symbolically enacted a bit later, when she takes after Mr. Schneider with a baseball bat. Of course, some bits of puerile humor remain; we're talking about Adam Sandler, remember, not Eric Rohmer. But the occasional bouts of scatology and crude sexual humor function, if you'll permit the oxymoron, as vulgar grace notes, decorating a surprisingly graceful and, in the end, impressively daring romantic comedy.
Ms. Barrymore plays Lucy, whom Henry encounters one morning at a diner. A year earlier, she suffered an injury to her temporal lobe in a car accident. As a comic premise, this may sound somewhat less than uproarious; something similar afflicted the tormented hero of ''Memento.'' But the makers of ''50 First Dates,'' like the Farrelly brothers at their best, have an ability to combine mockery with sympathy that disarms any impulse to take offense. Lucy, who wakes up each morning thinking that it is the day of the accident, lives in a perpetual present maintained by her gruff father (Blake Clark) and steroid-addled brother (Sean Astin, a long way from Middle Earth). They keep a ready supply of old newspapers, and each night they watch ''The Sixth Sense,'' feigning amazement at the discovery that Bruce Willis is a ghost.
Henry, who is instantly smitten with Lucy, upends their settled, sad routine. As he woos her, starting from scratch each time and contriving new ways to win her heart, your own memory may be stirred, since the conceit of an endlessly repeated day is also the subject of Harold Ramis's ''Groundhog Day.'' The less ambitious ''50 First Dates,'' which opens today nationwide, lacks that film's giddy metaphysical grandeur, and Mr. Sandler does not have either Bill Murray's prickliness or his range. But this movie does manage to be a deft and touching variation on the theme that, in brief measures and with enough practice, we can find some perfection in our lives.
When Lucy's doctor (Dan Aykroyd) patiently informs her, for the hundredth time, that her condition is permanent, he articulates the challenge facing both Henry and the filmmakers. For the film to succeed, what Henry does -- using his temporal advantage to manipulate Lucy into loving him -- must seem charming rather than cruel. His motives must be pure, which may at first glance seem like a lot to ask of Mr. Sandler. But, as in Paul Thomas Anderson's ''Punch-Drunk Love,'' the stubborn decency and fierce loyalty often obscured by his natural belligerence shine through, and you never question the ferocity or the steadfastness of Henry's love for Lucy.
Along with Emily Watson, the love interest in ''Punch-Drunk Love,'' Ms. Barrymore (who also appeared with Mr. Sandler in ''The Wedding Singer'') is this actor's best romantic counterpart. Rather than dwell on Lucy's helplessness, she emphasizes the character's pluck and intelligence, and, most crucially, she does not let Mr. Sandler monopolize the jokes.
Mr. Segal, whose filmography consists almost entirely of vehicles for ''Saturday Night Live,'' skips nimbly from one joke to the next and manages the story's sentimental turns with impressive agility. There are a few harsh, unfunny notes; it's one thing to make light of brain injuries, but quite another to turn Gary Busey's real, near-fatal motorcycle accident into a punch line.
But the unlikely sweetness of the story carries the day. What is most astonishing is the confidence with which the filmmakers push their premise to its logical conclusion, turning an ending that could have been either laughable or appalling into something so effortlessly heartfelt as to be nearly sublime.
''50 First Dates'' 
~

~
With crooked yellowed teeth that jut from a mouth that spews profanity in a surly staccato, a freckled weather-beaten face and a prizefighter's swagger, Charlize Theron pulls off the year's most astounding screen makeover in Patty Jenkins's film ''Monster.'' At the very least the disappearance of the cool and creamy blond star into the body of a ruddy, bedraggled street person is an astounding cosmetic stunt.
But Ms. Theron's transformation, supervised by the makeup wizard Toni G, is not just a matter of surfaces. As Aileen Wuornos, the notorious Florida murderer whose career in homicide was sensationalized when the press inaccurately called her the first female serial killer, she uncovers the lost, love-starved child cowering under the killer's hard shell. The emotional intensity of her unforgettable performance recalls Hilary Swank's Oscar-winning turn in ''Boys Don't Cry,'' a bleak slice of American life that leaves the same bitter aftertaste as ''Monster.''
Wuornos, who confessed to murdering six men in the late 1980's and early 90's, died in the electric chair on Oct. 9, 2002, after spending more than a decade on death row. The movie, which focuses on her desperate, last-ditch relationship with Selby Wall (Christina Ricci), the lesbian lover who ended up testifying against her, is sporadically narrated by Wuornos.
Its fatalistic mood is set in an opening monologue in which she recalls a miserable childhood whose emptiness she filled with cheap fantasies of stardom and true love. Her naïve faith in the existence of a rescuing Prince Charming led Wuornos to begin turning tricks at 13.
By the time the movie begins, Wuornos has plied her trade for years as a hitchhiking low-rent prostitute working the highways of central Florida. Her hopes have dried up. Down to her last five dollars and contemplating suicide, she drops into a saloon (that happens to be a lesbian bar) for one last drink, and meets Selby. After an edgy initial conversation Wuornos, who has never had sex with a woman, ends up spending the night with her.
Because it is her first relationship in years to provide a semblance of affection, she grabs on to Selby and hangs on ferociously.
The film is so determined not to sentimentalize the affair that it is shown as a sad case study of dysfunction and desperate co-dependence. Its ultimate aridity parallels the impersonal semi-urban wasteland of central Florida with its strip malls, seedy bars and gas stations.
Selby, who has been shipped from Ohio to Florida by religious parents who can't deal with her sexuality, is an emotional basket case with a streak of timid rebellion. Once their affair is under way, Wuornos takes the reins and plays the role of a blustering, pseudomacho breadwinner and promises her sullen, needy partner the moon and stars.
Determined to give up prostitution and get a respectable job, Wuornos, pumped full of unrealistic expectations but lacking a marketable skill, endures a series of humiliating job interviews that are made all the worse by her own grating refusal to accept rejection. The movie's most painful scenes illustrate the chasm between the smug workaday world and the demimonde of unsocialized outsiders who are clueless about the job market.
The movie's biggest disappointment is the vague, unfocused performance of Ms. Ricci, an actress known for taking risky, unsympathetic roles. Here she seems somewhat intimidated by her character. Although Ms. Jenkins's screenplay gives her the seeds to create a complex portrait, Ms. Ricci resists plumbing Selby's selfish, shallow exterior to discover her humanity.
The dramatic turning point arrives when Wuornos, driven back to prostitution, picks up a sadist (Vincent Corey) who ties her up and rapes her in an assault almost as horrifying as the rape scene in ''Boys Don't Cry.'' Freeing herself, she shoots him dead, buries his body and takes his money and car.
Something has permanently snapped inside Wuornos, and her once-suppressed fury at men is unleashed. The rest of her killings (not all are shown) could be seen as paranoid responses to the rape.
All are carried out to get money, which is quickly squandered on free-spending binges in motels and bars, and any sympathy you might have had for Wuornos after the rape begins to evaporate. One victim is a geeky, bumbling virgin; another a mild-mannered family man who tries in vain to reason with her.
What makes these encounters all the sadder is Wuornos's obvious horror and guilt at the pattern she has begun repeating.
Once she kills a policeman in civilian clothes, it's only a matter of time before she is identified and brought to justice.
Her final comment is a summary retort to all the comforting upbeat maxims like ''Everything happens for a reason,'' and ''Where there's life, there's hope,'' that help us fend off despair. After reeling off the list, she sneers, ''They've gotta tell you something.''
''Monster'' rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has a graphic rape scene, several murders and abundant profanity.
MONSTER
Written and directed by Patty Jenkins; director of photography, Steven Bernstein; edited by Jane Kurson and Arthur Coburn; music by BT; production designer, Edward T. McAvoy; Toni G, key makeup artist; produced by Charlize Theron, Mark Damon, Clark Peterson, Donald Kushner and Brad Wyman; released by Newmarket Films. Running time: 111 minutes. This film 
~
''House of Sand and Fog,'' adapted from the novel by Andre Dubus III, is one of several recent movies that try to harvest the terror and grandeur of classical tragedy from the everyday sorrows of contemporary American life. In some ways, Vadim Perelman's film, an impressively self-assured directing debut, is more rigorous, or at least more Greek, in its understanding of tragedy than either Clint Eastwood's ''Mystic River'' or Alejandro González Iñárritu's ''21 Grams.''
Like Antigone, it is the story of two rights adding up to a monstrous wrong. There are no clear villains, no serendipitous, life-altering accidents, only the slow, inexorable escalation of hasty decisions and excusable lapses in judgment toward an unbearable final catastrophe.
The film's antagonists -- an exiled Iranian military officer named Massoud Behrani and a housecleaner named Kathy Nicolo, who is recovering from years of addiction and the breakup of her marriage -- are both acting in defense of principles that seem unarguable. At issue between them is a modest piece of coastal California real estate -- the house of the title -- to which both seem to have an equally legitimate claim. Kathy (Jennifer Connelly), who inherited the house from her father, is evicted for failing to pay a county business tax mistakenly assessed against the property. Colonel Behrani (Ben Kingsley) buys the house at auction, hoping to restore his family's fortune by selling it at a profit.
Though he thinks of himself as a fastidiously practical man, Behrani is motivated by much more than financial interest. He endures the humiliation of menial labor -- working on a road-maintenance crew and behind the counter at a gas station convenience store -- by clinging to the trappings of his former life, coming home from his jobs in tailored suits and a sleek Mercedes sedan. For him the house does not just represent an immigrant's share in the American dream: taking possession of it is his way of refurbishing the dream of a vanished imperial Iran.
''House of Sand and Fog,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is the nearly flawless execution of a deeply flawed premise. Mr. Perelman inadvertently exposes the inconsistencies in Mr. Dubus's novel even as he comes very close to overcoming them. He eschews the fashionable techniques of provocation and shock, declining to rub our faces in raw misery with extreme close-ups, grainy cinematography and punched-up editing. The film, shot by Roger Deakins, has a somber, elegant look and a style that might best be described as tactful, as if some of the grace and formality of the Behrani household had rubbed off on the director.
That household, with its polished brass coffee table and overstuffed furniture, is the emotional and dramatic center of the movie. Mr. Kingsley is an actor of formidable reserve, and when he lets it go, you feel as if the world itself has broken open. The deepest pathos comes from the quietest performer, Shohreh Aghdashloo, who speaks very little (in Farsi and broken English) and whose eloquence resides in her weary, lovely face. Next to her poise and delicacy, Ms. Connelly seems a little blank, as if she were suppressing her smartness and agility to play a woman of greater passivity and lesser intelligence.
Behrani is a man accustomed to command, and he exercises a sometimes brutal tyranny over his wife (Ms. Aghashloo) and son (Jonathan Ahdout) to defend his beleaguered sense of patriarchal infallibility. His principal flaw, a furious reluctance to relinquish control, is perfectly -- that is, fatally -- symmetrical with Kathy's inability to maintain control.
For Kathy, the house represents more than comfort and shelter -- more, even, than a link with her scattered family and distant childhood. It is the only source of stability she has, and the loss of it is like the breaching of a fragile sea wall, unleashing a flood tide of bad luck and self-destructive behavior.
Her last lifeline is the kindness of Lester Burdon (Ron Eldard), a sheriff's deputy who helped evict her from her house and decides to help her get it back. His motives are not entirely unselfish, and he seems to feed on Kathy's self-destructiveness, offering himself up as a steadfast protector even as he nudges her off the wagon and willfully risks his marriage and career to be with her.
None of these three people are particularly likable, but they all seem worthy of sympathy, in part because they remain capable of showing it. Even as the conflict over the house escalates, Behrani, Lester and Kathy all hold on to compassion and decency, and even show signs of a willingness to relent. They seem to agree that no house is worth a human life, which makes the heavily foreshadowed final cataclysm especially painful and powerful.
And also, in the end, somewhat implausible. The conflict between Kathy and Behrani arises from a sin so trivial as to be almost comical: if Kathy had only opened her mail, the whole mess might have been avoided. And every stage of its escalation seems determined less by the psychology of the characters than by the forced, schematic logic of the story. You feel the heavy, implacable force of the narrative without quite believing it.
''House of Sand and Fog'' 
~
After the galloping intelligence displayed in the first two parts of ''The Lord of the Rings'' trilogy, your fear may be that the director, Peter Jackson, would become cautious and unimaginative with the last episode, ''The Return of the King.'' Look at what ''The Matrix'' did to the Wachowski brothers; the last two were like action movies made for CNBC.
But Mr. Jackson crushes any such fear. His ''King'' is a meticulous and prodigious vision made by a director who was not hamstrung by heavy use of computer special-effects imagery. A sequence in which a number of signal fires are lighted on a stretch of mountain ranges simultaneously is a towering moment; it has the majesty that every studio's opening logo shot sprains itself striving to achieve.
Mr. Jackson does take his time, but he's not sloughing off here. Rather he is building toward a more than solid conclusion. The grandiloquence that sustained the second installment, ''The Two Towers,'' with its pounding and operatic martial fury -- a movie that actually created a state of siege and left audiences hanging -- can be found here.
Yet by its end ''King'' glides to the gentle bonhomie that opened the ''Rings'' movies, with an epilogue that is tinged with regret. It's been a long time since a commercially oriented film with the scale of ''King'' ended with such an enduring and heartbreaking coda: ''You can't go back. Some wounds don't heal.'' It's an epic about the price of triumph, a subversive victory itself in a large-scale pop action film.
The closest thing to a recap of the previous films, ''The Fellowship of the Rings'' and ''Towers,'' this picture supplies is showing Gollum (Andy Serkis) as a regular hobbit -- Smeagol -- before he was subsumed by his appetite for the glittering One Ring and transformed into a larval creature that looks like the worm Smeagol is shown putting on a hook. It's the One Ring that the hobbit Frodo (Elijah Wood) has to transport to Mordor and destroy it there.
The collaboration of actor and director -- Mr. Serkis and Mr. Jackson -- for Gollum is a frighteningly believable realization of computer imagery as performer. Gollum, whose phyllo-dough skin still masks his abrupt and fully felt changes of heart, is as emotionally rich a creation as any actor's work this year. A dialogue he has with his reflection in a pond courses with invective and self-disgust. All of Mr. Jackson's glib, funny pranks in ''Heavenly Creatures'' and ''The Frighteners'' -- in which we were never supposed to be sure what was going on -- prepared him for a dramatic application of those techniques here. (He also employs his haunted-house dexterity in a formidable sequence with a giant spider.)
Gollum's push-pull, divided between his hunger for the ring and his fears, makes him the most tragic figure in the movie. He preys on Frodo's weakened spirit, looking for the moment he can get the ring away and kill them both. The cursed ring pecks away at Frodo's humanity, as Gollum hammers away at the hobbit's remaining panes of will. The only thing keeping the wizened yet infantile goblin at bay is Frodo's loyal ally and sworn protector, Sam (Sean Astin). By making Gollum as integral a part of this tableau as Frodo and Sam, not only is there an important plot point at stake, but the movie is also frosted with misery.
That mournful note echoes as Aragorn (Viggo Mortensen) and his forces ready for their assault on Sauron's forces, the orcs. Gandalf (Ian McKellen), in a voice sodden with mellow sadness, realizes that Frodo and Sam are on a suicide mission: ''There never was much hope. Just a false hope.'' Sir Ian's eyes move slowly, filled with mystery and pain.
There is a sacrificial cast to the entire endeavor. The dwarf warrior Gimli thrives on this fatalistic bent, and is given a wry heedlessness by John Rhys-Davies; his charm-offense basso rumble is also the voice of the lord of the forest, Treebeard. The pitilessly sure elf warrior Legolas (Orlando Bloom, whose physical élan fills out the role) observes ''a sleepless malice'' watching over them. The hobbit Pippin has a much bigger role in this battle, and Billy Boyd is up to it, allowing Pippin to mature.
Aragorn has the slinky swagger and dreamy stubble that make him look like a legend created by Tolkien, Sam Shepard and Ralph Lauren. Fortunately Mr. Mortensen also has a touch of modesty as an actor, which allows him to take up space as if he belongs in the center of the frame rather than battling the other performers for it.
Pippin's pal, Merry (Dominic Monaghan), joins the fight, too, pulled along by Eowyn (Miranda Otto, touchingly ferocious). Ms. Otto stakes a worthy claim for every moment of screen time, while poor Liv Tyler, as the elf princess Arwen, is limited to dialogue that sounds like a spoken portion of a Spinal Tap album. Cate Blanchett's Galadriel hardly appears at all, and Hugo Weaving, as the elf lord Elrond, arrives just in time to answer a trivia question. (Who is the best-known Australian actor to appear in the ''Matrix'' and ''Rings'' movies?)
The actors all look older than they did in ''Fellowship,'' and it fits the strategy of employing the same cast over an extended period for the films. This decision adds fresh dimension to the lingering sadness, as we can see some of the bloom worn out of their flesh and sadder, reddened eyes on all of them.
Their battle weariness is appropriate given whom they are up against. The orcs and their terrifying behemoths of burden have a surreal confidence in victory; they even turn the phrase ''Release the prisoners'' into a threat. Sauron's misshapen foot soldiers and their collection of mutated animal freaks look as if they've crawled out of the sewers of Love Canal looking for summer work.
''King,'' which opens round the country tomorrow, features more prognostication and exposition than its predecessors. Yet despite all of the setups required, Mr. Jackson maintains tension. In ''Towers,'' the director and his fellow screenwriters, Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens, secured a spiritual fidelity to the novel. In ''King'' they manage that and far more; the last third is especially condensed, and Aragon's role in the last battle is fleshed out. But the Tolkien search for purity is central to their ''King,'' too. And the movie isn't as exclusionary as the books' implicit Christian forcefulness, which made Middle Earth a re-creation of the Crusades.
''King'' is the product of impressive craft and energy. The ''sleepless malice'' is aligned with controlled chaos; the sizable exertion of concentration from Mr. Jackson is multiplied by his ''Rings'' team, including his cinematographer, Andrew Lesnie; composer, Howard Shore; production designer, Grant Major; and the battalion of other artisans responsible for the costumes, makeup and special effects.
It is evident that the grip of ''The Return of the King'' on Mr. Jackson is not unlike the grasp the One Ring exerts over Frodo: it's tough for him to let go, which is why the picture feels as if it has an excess of endings. But he can be forgiven. Why not allow him one last extra bow?
''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' 
~
About two-thirds of the way through ''Something's Gotta Give,'' Diane Keaton bursts into tears. Her character, a divorced, middle-aged playwright named Erica Barry, has seen her quiet life of professional fulfillment and romantic disappointment unexpectedly disrupted by love and then, in short order, by heartbreak. Erica's sobs, sniffles and wails seem endless and uncontrollable, expressing every conceivable combination of hurt, humiliation and anger. Her crying jag, which seems to last for several months, continues without interruption through a half-dozen cuts and scene changes, carrying Erica through nearly every room in her large, airy East Hampton beach house.
But ''Something's Gotta Give,'' which opens nationwide today, is a comedy. At the sneak preview I attended last week, the harder Erica cried, the harder the audience laughed, which I might have found disturbing if I had not been laughing so helplessly myself.
This mirth was not cruel or derisive; it was instead an odd but nonetheless apt measure of the audience's sympathy and affection for Erica and a tribute to Ms. Keaton's unparalleled comic skill. Nobody else working in movies today can make her own misery such a source of delight or make the spectacle of utter embarrassment look like a higher form of dignity. Erica is by turns prickly, indecisive, uptight, vulnerable, self-assured and skittish: traits Ms. Keaton blends into a performance that is at once entirely coherent and dizzyingly unpredictable.
The smash hit play Erica eventually writes -- her delicious revenge on the man who caused her such pain -- is called ''A Woman to Love,'' which would have been a much better title for this unusually satisfying comic romance than the empty and generic one it has. Erica lifts the phrase from one of her two suitors, a smooth-faced, star-struck young doctor named Julian, played in tongue-in-cheek Ralph Bellamy deadpan by Keanu Reeves. The movie is built around the wonderful and entirely persuasive conceit that both Mr. Reeves and Jack Nicholson could find themselves hopelessly smitten with an intelligent and accomplished woman in her 50's.
Mr. Nicholson plays Harry Sanborn, a rich, 62-year-old bachelor who has devoted his life to philosophy: the Playboy Philosophy, circa 1966. Harry prides himself on never having dated a woman over 30, and at the start of the movie his babe of the moment is Erica's daughter, Marin (Amanda Peet).
Mr. Nicholson may not, strictly speaking, be playing himself, but he seems to have prepared for the role by studying a few decades' worth of interviews and magazine profiles celebrating his unapologetic libertinism. And if his casting is an obvious joke, it is nonetheless a good one, thanks to his devilish combination of high-spirited rakishness and old-school gallantry.
After suffering a heart attack during a bit of hanky panky with Marin, Harry finds himself under Erica's reluctant care, stranded in her house, where the rules of bedroom farce are strictly enforced. Logy and disoriented, Harry stumbles into Erica's bedroom and sees her naked, an event that casts an awkward pall over their relationship as well as foreshadowing its eventual consummation.
''Something's Gotta Give'' was written and directed by Nancy Meyers, who has, from ''Private Benjamin'' to ''What Women Want,'' demonstrated a thorough, if not always breathtakingly original, flair for the conventions of mainstream quasi-feminist comedy. She and Ms. Keaton have worked together before, in the yuppie crisis comedy ''Baby Boom'' and the retrofitted ''Father of the Bride'' pictures, in which Ms. Keaton was unimaginatively relegated to the role of Steve Martin's patient wife and obliging straight man.
''Something's Gotta Give,'' true to form, does not really depart from the genial, sentimental formulas of its genre. Some of the jokes are flat, and some scenes that should sparkle with screwball effervescence sputter instead. But what Ms. Meyers lacks in inventiveness she makes up for in generosity, to the actors and therefore to the audience.
Mr. Nicholson and Ms. Keaton -- last seen together, in rather different circumstances, as Eugene O'Neill and Louise Bryant in Warren Beatty's ''Reds'' -- spar with the freedom of professionals with nothing left to prove, and Mr. Nicholson has the gentlemanly grace to step aside and let Ms. Keaton claim the movie. She in turn brings out the best in everyone around her. Mr. Reeves, liberated from the Matrix and the burden of being the One, mocks his own mellow blandness but conveys his character's ardor for Erica without the slightest hint of facetiousness.
Frances McDormand, as Erica's sister, a professor of women's studies, sidesteps the temptations of caricature and tosses off some of the movie's funniest lines. Ms. Peet, zany and appealing in an underwritten role, continues her steady, zigzagging growth into one of the most interesting (and, by this critic at least, often underestimated) young actresses around. If she keeps it up, she could be the next Diane Keaton.
Which, as of this writing, is about the highest praise I can confer. After Erica's tears have dried, she and the audience are rewarded with a giddy, Lubitschean third act, which swirls through Manhattan and the Caribbean before touching down -- but of course -- in Paris for a sweetly predictable denouement. If Erica's distress makes you laugh, her richly deserved joy might just bring a tear to your eye.
Julian had it right: she is a woman to love. ''You're incredibly sexy,'' he says to her at one point.
''I swear to God, I'm not,'' she replies.
I swear to God, she's wrong.
''Something's Gotta Give'' 
~
At the start of ''In America,'' Sarah and Johnny Sullivan arrive at the United States-Canadian border in a swaybacked station wagon with their two daughters in the back seat. They are from Ireland, and they are coming to the United States illegally so Johnny can find work as an actor and they can start over after the death of their young son, Frankie.
With the help of their surviving children, the chirpy Ariel and the watchful, reserved Christy, they manage to charm their way past a suspicious immigration agent, who decides to believe that they are carefree vacationers rather than desperate migrants.
This modest, touching film, which opens today in selected cities, accomplishes a similar sleight of hand. The family drives wide-eyed through Times Square and alights in a cavernous, battered walk-up apartment that is quickly spruced up with colorful paint and scavenged furniture. The neighbors are a mostly harmless collection of addicts, hustlers and ordinary poor folk, as well as a reclusive painter named Mateo (Djimon Hounsou), who seems to be dying of AIDS and whom the girls befriend one Halloween.
Many of the elements in this film -- the picturesque poverty; the angelic, doomed man; the dead child; the hard-working, sorrow-afflicted parents; the cute, precocious daughters; the risky pregnancy toward the end -- seem to promise a sticky bath of shameless sentimentality. But instead, thanks to Jim Sheridan's graceful, scrupulously sincere direction and the dry intelligence of his cast, ''In America'' is likely to pierce the defenses of all but the most dogmatically cynical viewers.
Mr. Sheridan has accomplished this trick before, turning stories that might have otherwise foundered in maudlin excess into sharp, engrossing character studies. ''My Left Foot,'' about the disabled artist Christy Brown, might have easily been a hectoring, smiley-faced treatise on the plight of the handicapped, just as ''In the Name of the Father'' might have been a lecture on the plight of Irish political prisoners and ''The Field'' a soapbox harangue on the plight of small landowners.
But Mr. Sheridan is more interested in particular people than in general plights, and what lingers in the mind after you have seen his movies is the rough, radiant individuality of his characters.
It helps that Paddy Considine and Samantha Morton, who play Johnny and Sarah, are not well-known movie stars, and that neither is much inclined toward ostentation.
Ms. Morton, her hair cropped short and her enormous eyes stung with grief, seems to haunt the edges of the frame until you realize that the blunt, inarticulate force of her feeling is at the center of the drama.
Mr. Considine, with his gaunt, droopy features and darting eyes, guards Johnny's privacy behind a facade of genial good spirits.
That the two of them remain somewhat mysterious is fitting, because the movie, which Mr. Sheridan wrote with two of his daughters, perceives them largely through the eyes of their children.
The family survives through an unspoken pact of mutual protection that becomes plain to us only as it starts to unravel. The girls, played by real-life sisters, Emma and Sarah Bolger, agree not to notice how much their parents are suffering and to distract them from it as best they can.
''In America'' is Mr. Sheridan's most personal movie so far -- just how personal will become clear when you see the dedication at the end -- and he is too modest to turn his family's experiences into a parable of anything larger. The title of the movie sounds a little grandiose, but it is meant to evoke a postcard, or a child's diary (like the one Christy composes with her video camera): not ''this is what it means to be in America'' but ''this is what we saw when we were there.''
This movie, from moment to moment, feels small, almost anecdotal. It is only afterward that, like Mr. Sheridan's other films, it starts to grow into something at once unassuming and in its own way grand.
In America 
~
''DO you want to see a guillotine in Piccadilly? Do you want your children to grow up singing the 'Marseillaise'?'' This is Jack Aubrey, commander of H.M.S. Surprise, rousing the patriotism of his men as they prepare to engage a faster, larger French vessel somewhere off the coast of South America. This ship is England, he proclaims, and ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World,'' which opens nationwide today, makes his point with magnificent vigor and precision.
This stupendously entertaining movie, directed by Peter Weir and adapted from two of the novels in Patrick O'Brian's 20-volume series on Aubrey's naval exploits, celebrates an idea of England that might have seemed a bit corny even in 1805, when the action takes place. The Surprise is a stiffly hierarchal place of pomp and ritual that is nonetheless consecrated to ideals of fair play, decency and honor and ruled by a man whose claim on the words in the film's title comes, if not by divine right, then at least by demi-godlike force of character.
Of course, life on the Surprise is not all high-minded talk and principled action. Winston Churchill once said that the foundations of British naval tradition consisted of rum, sodomy and the lash. ''Master and Commander,'' which 
~
I have to admit that of all the worthy and interesting movies opening this fall, ''Shattered Glass'' was the one I was most looking forward to. I also have to admit that the keenness of my anticipation made me a little suspicious -- of myself and of the movie, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles.
The film, written and directed by Billy Ray, deals with the case of Stephen Glass, a young writer and editor at The New Republic who, in the spring of 1998, was discovered to have fabricated, in whole or in part, more than two dozen articles he had published in that venerable journal of opinion.
As everyone discussing ''Shattered Glass'' is bound to observe, there are obvious parallels between Mr. Glass's behavior and that of Jayson Blair, the reporter who was found last spring to have invented or plagiarized portions of at least three dozen articles in The New York Times.
But even if the memory of the Blair scandal were not painfully fresh, the earlier debacle would still exert a morbid fascination among journalists of a certain age and temperament, the kind of people who spend way too much time surfing media-gossip blogs and Web sites and who are generally obsessed with tracking the behavior of the fish in the neighboring bowls. Those people (I know a few of them) are insular and self-obsessed enough as it is, and the last thing they -- oh, all right, we -- need is a movie that amplifies and feeds upon that narcissism.
''Shattered Glass'' does that well enough (at least I thought so), but it is also, I am happy to report, much more than a knowing, insidery docudrama about a magazine that has long prided itself on its inside-the-Beltway knowingness. (The Clinton-era New Republic is described several times, with minimal irony, as the ''in-flight magazine of Air Force One.'')
The movie is a serious, well-observed examination of the practice of journalism, and if it takes note of the vanity and obsessiveness that are among the vices of the profession, it also acknowledges (and perhaps romanticizes) the hard work and idealism that are among its virtues.
But Mr. Ray, a screenwriter (''Hart's War'') making his debut as a director, has grasped that the themes of this story -- ambition, loyalty, betrayal and deceit -- are not confined to journalism. He has constructed an astute and surprisingly gripping drama not only about the ethics of magazine writing, but also, more generally, about the subtle political and psychological dynamics of modern office culture.
Glass, played by Hayden Christensen, is clearly motivated by a hunger for glory. At work, he is constantly receiving calls from important publications, which he shrugs off with transparent false modesty. (''Are you talking to Policy Review?'' someone asks him. He replies with affected nonchalance, ''It's probably nothing.'') But he also, and perhaps more deeply, has a desperate need for the esteem and affection of his colleagues.
His moments of greatest triumph seem to come not when the magazine publishes his fanciful articles -- about young Republican debauchery at a Washington hotel, about a trade fair devoted to trinkets commemorating the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal, about a teenage hacker with an agent and a million-dollar software contract -- but when he pitches them at editorial meetings, working his audience like an anxious nightclub comedian. He feeds on the laughter and amazement, and his showboating is accompanied by displays of childlike insecurity.
''I probably won't even do anything with it,'' he says after rolling out one of his too-good-to-be-true story ideas, waiting a beat for the praise and reassurance that are sure to follow. ''Are you mad at me?'' he asks whenever someone raises even the smallest question about his work, and of course no one ever is. For a while at least Glass's eagerness to apologize for his small lapses deflects attention from his ever more extravagant lies.
Mr. Christensen, best known for his light-saber work as the young Anakin Skywalker in the latest ''Star Wars'' episodes, finds the perfect balance between creepiness and charm.
It is easy to see how the rest of the staff -- including the magazine's beloved editor, Michael Kelly (Hank Azaria) and a lightly fictionalized senior editor named Caitlin (Chloë Sevigny) -- are taken in by Glass's brilliant little-brother act.
Midway through the film Mr. Ray ingeniously and almost imperceptibly shifts the story's center of gravity from Glass to Charles Lane (Peter Sarsgaard), who took over after Mr. Kelly's abrupt dismissal and who brought Glass's journalistic felonies to light after an Internet journalist named Adam Penenberg (Steve Zahn) began raising questions about the hacker article.
Mr. Lane, who now writes for The Washington Post, is the hero of ''Shattered Glass,'' and it should be noted that he also worked on the film as a paid consultant. But Mr. Sarsgaard's performance is hardly a simple embodiment of nobility. At the beginning, Lane seems cold and a little priggish, aloof from the warm, competitive camaraderie that binds the rest of the staff together.
As Lane starts to investigate Glass's misdeeds, he is suspected of pursuing a vendetta against writers loyal to Kelly. As we begin to see Glass through Lane's eyes, the film's mood darkens and its pace accelerates; what had started as a sharp workplace comedy becomes a clammy, vertiginous psychological thriller. The only false note comes near the end, when the magazine's moment of shame is rather too eagerly transformed into an occasion for self-congratulation.
That lapse only underscores the movie's overall meticulousness. A more showily ambitious film might have tried to delve into Glass's personal history in search of an explanation for his behavior, or to draw provocative connections between that behavior and the cultural and political climate of the times. Such a movie would also have been conventional, facile and ultimately false. Mr. Ray knows better than to sensationalize a story about the dangers of sensationalism. ''Shattered Glass'' is good enough to be true.
''Shattered Glass'' 
~
''21 Grams'' is a ruminative, stunned look at life after death -- that is, the existence of the living after they have been devastated by loss; it's the aftermath. The actors playing the characters who have been rocked by catastrophe don't sink to theatrical histrionics; instead they're linked by the red-eyed, unblinking stare of zombies, and they shamble through their day-by-day activities as if saddled with death wishes they are too enervated to act upon: American Existentialism.
The stars, Sean Penn, Benicio Del Toro and Naomi Watts, achieve something that doesn't sound as if it's possible: a virtuosity in the depiction of people wasting away minute by minute. Be prepared for it. You won't come out unaffected, because the depths of intimacy that the Mexican director Alejandro González Iñárritu plumbs here are so rarely touched by filmmakers that ''21 Grams'' is tantamount to the discovery of a new country. It's too early to call it a crowning work of a career -- this is only his second film -- but it may well be the crowning work of this year. It is being shown tomorrow night at the New York Film Festival and will be released nationwide on Nov. 14.
Working with the screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga and the bewilderingly versatile cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto -- the team he assembled for his debut feature, ''Amores Perros'' -- Mr. González Iñárritu once again deals with three scenarios connected by one far-reaching cataclysm.
Prof. Paul Rivers (Mr. Penn) is suffering from a damaged heart, which is about to give out on him, and the transplant he receives so consumes him with guilt that he's like a death-row prisoner with a horrible secret who's been pardoned. He still believes he deserves to die. Cristina (Ms. Watts), a reformed party girl, has returned to her fallen ways after taking up with Paul. She's lost her family in an auto accident. And Jack (Mr. Del Toro) is a shaggy, trembling mountain of anger he can barely contain. His already tenuous grasp on sobriety is slipping away even faster since being involved in a terrible incident.
''Amores Perros'' dealt with the inevitability of Fate -- one's ability to handle a life-changing event that defined you as either an adult or a child. The theme of ''21 Grams'' is similar and uses a Faulknerian idea of Old Testament grace, focusing on three people unable to absorb that quality. And for Paul, Cristina and Jack, grace is a destination that, to quote ''As I Lay Dying,'' is ''a day's long, hard ride away.'' Mr. Arriaga's splintered style of storytelling -- breaking a mirror and piecing it back together with small, telling parts missing -- could owe as much to Faulkner as it does to Quentin Tarantino.
Passion is important here because the characters have it snatched from their souls. Pursuit of passion manifests itself for each of the three leads in totally different ways. Mr. Penn, an actor of sometimes embarrassingly direct volatility, plays Paul as a gentle but self-possessed man stripped of his intellectual arrogance. He still stands upright, but each move is unsteady. He regains part of that passion only in acts of dissolution, but he worsens things because these acts don't fulfill him.
Because Ms. Watts reinvents herself with each performance, it's easy to forget how brilliant she is. She has a boldness that comes from a lack of overemphasis, something actresses sometimes do to keep up with Mr. Penn, whose virtuosity can be a challenge. Cristina clings to Paul and to the self-abasement that is all she has left; she treats it like a calling. It's easy to note, though, that Cristina occasionally stares as if she could will her former, happy life to being by locating a vision of it on the horizon.
This triptych of psychological affliction is completed by the protean Mr. Del Toro. His potency as an actor is deepened because in addition to his emotional gifts he is a performer of great physical dignity; he loses it in ''21 Grams,'' and it's a sure sign of the control Mr. Del Toro has that it can be seen slipping away.
The film is also full of fine supporting performances. Each of the characters' wrecked lives takes on fuller shape from the loved ones beaten down by neglect. Charlotte Gainsbourg plays Paul's wife, and her unusually striking face -- beautiful from one angle, odd from another -- is so completely expressive that it does much of the work for her. As Jack's wife, Melissa Leo makes her relationship to a man given to tremendous and simultaneous hostility and remorse so real it's absorbing and painful to watch.
The intelligence of completing the picture by displaying the suffering through the eyes of the leads' loved ones makes ''21 Grams'' an extraordinarily satisfying vision.
The title refers to the amount of mass said to escape the body at the moment of death -- the supposed weight of the soul. But the movie also evokes the majestic heartbreak of the Willie Nelson song ''Three Days,'' a misery compounded by the sweetness of K. D. Lang's cover: ''Three days, filled with tears and sorrow -- yesterday, today and tomorrow.''
21 GRAMS
Directed by Alejandro González Iñárritu; written by Guillermo Arriaga; director of photography, Rodrigo Prieto; edited by Stephen Mirrione; music by Gustavo Santaolalla; production designer, Brigitte Broch; produced by Mr. González Iñárritu and Robert Solerno; released by Focus Features. Running time: 125 minutes. This film 
~
''Dying is an art.'' These words, from Sylvia Plath's poem ''Lady Lazarus,'' are the first spoken in ''Sylvia,'' Christine Jeffs's emotionally rich life of the poet, who is played with radiant conviction by Gwyneth Paltrow. The assertion may be debatable, but there is no question that Plath's own death -- she committed suicide in 1963, at 30 -- has been subject to unending analysis and interpretation, framed by the kind of inquiry that usually guides classroom literary analysis. (The literary critic A. Alvarez, who was Plath's close friend and who is portrayed in the movie by Jared Harris, likened her death to a final unwritten poem.) What was Plath's intention? What did her suicide mean? What did it reveal about her family, her society, her time, her sex, herself?
The answers to these questions, chewed over by biographers, novelists, polemicists and fellow poets, have been contentious, and nothing in Plath's biography has proved more polarizing than her marriage to Ted Hughes, who survived her and became Britain's poet laureate in 1984. (He died of cancer in 1998.) Hughes's role in Plath's adult life (they married in 1956), his behavior in the period just before her death and his subsequent actions as the executor of her literary estate have been at the heart of an interminable argument about Plath's legacy, and have at times overshadowed her own poetry as well as his. Many of Plath's admirers treat her as a martyr and Hughes as, symbolically if not actually, her murderer. Her short life has become, fairly or not, a parable of the stifling of women's self-expression by a chauvinist literary establishment in the years before feminism. Those more sympathetic to Hughes have preferred to see him as a fellow sufferer, a flawed, talented man married to a gifted woman with a history of mental disturbance, who had first tried to kill herself long before she met him.
Although partisans on both sides may disagree, ''Sylvia,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, tries to address the Plath-Hughes marriage even-handedly and resists the urge to turn its heroine's life into allegory. It is more like opera, which is braver, and also more fitting. Ms. Paltrow looks a lot like Plath and speaks with the right semi-Anglicized American preppy accent, but her performance goes well beyond mimicry. She has a vivid, passionate presence, even when her lively features have gone slack with depression and her bright blue eyes have glazed over.
Daniel Craig is a bit more opaque. In Hughes's poems, which are full of violent animal imagery, hawks and crows have a special totemic significance, and Mr. Craig, with his craggy, shadowed face, looks like a rangy, wounded bird of prey. His voice is a low growl, and his sexual magnetism, the trait that is the movie's main concern, is palpable.
The two young poets meet at a party at Cambridge University. At the end of their first kiss, he steals one of her earrings and she bites his cheek, drawing blood. Later, at a small gathering in period-shabby student rooms, they hurl passages of Shakespeare at each other, then tumble into bed. Sex and poetry are linked in this film as if by a high-tension, high-voltage wire, and while the connection may seem facile, it is also, with respect to these writers and their milieu, entirely plausible.
When Ted insists to Sylvia that the true subject of her poetry should be herself, it is worth recalling that, to them, this was not yet a therapeutic cliché but a radical and dangerous creative enterprise. And their fervid, all-consuming desire to be poets is a heady mixture of careerism and more exalted ambitions.
But how to dramatize the creative process and its psychic costs? This is the principal challenge facing any movie about a writer, and it dooms many honorable efforts to either timidity or ridiculousness. (Think of Nicole Kidman, in her Virginia Woolf mask, muttering to those poor daffodils in ''The Hours.'') It helps, in this case, that Ms. Jeffs has a lyrical sensibility that matches her subject. Her jagged, dreamy first feature, ''Rain,'' about a teenage girl's loss of innocence, is at once wide-eyed and pitilessly precise in its psychological insights, qualities it shares with some of Plath's later verses. Ms. Jeffs's understanding of Plath, like Ms. Paltrow's, is deep and sincere, and ultimately more intuitive than analytical. ''Sylvia,'' rather than trying to explain Plath, wants to burrow into her personality without disturbing its mysteries.
The dramatic crux of the movie is the triangle that develops between Plath, Hughes and Assia Wevill (Amira Casar), who became Hughes's second wife, and whose subsequent suicide was a grisly echo of Plath's. The supporting performances, notably Mr. Harris and Blythe Danner, as Plath's stern and sympathetic mother, Aurelia, are excellent. But the emotional core of ''Sylvia'' lies in the feverish transactions between Ms. Jeffs, Ms. Paltrow and the hovering shade of the poet herself. The psychological dynamics of the marriage, unsettled by professional envy and sexual jealousy, are duly noted, but the film's emotions are too big, too untidy and too strange to be contained by its story.
John Toon's cinematography has the thick, oversaturated look of old Technicolor, and the honeyed light that usually surrounds Ms. Paltrow darkens as Plath's miseries increase. The film itself, somewhat like Todd Haynes's ''Far From Heaven,'' which was set around the same time, is oversaturated with feeling, and also with music, as Gabriel Yared's feverish score sends a ripple of melodrama through otherwise ordinary scenes.
This may trouble those who insist on austere literalism in their biopics, but it seems to me that a movie about poets -- especially about these poets, who use blank verse as an aphrodisiac and who gather around the phonograph to listen to a recording of Robert Lowell reading ''The Quaker Graveyard in Nantucket'' -- is entitled to some passionate recklessness of its own.
And the poetry that Ms. Paltrow and Ms. Jeffs enact together compensates somewhat for the film's skimpy use of Plath's own words. Toward the end, as she composes the poems that would, when published as ''Ariel,'' secure her posthumous reputation, the words rush onto the soundtrack in a jumble of discontinuous lines, and we hear almost nothing of her earlier work (and nothing at all of Hughes's, though Mr. Craig does a fine recitation of Yeats's ''Sorrows of Love'').
It is Plath's writing that represents, after all the polemicizing is done, her surest claim on our attention. The makers of ''Sylvia'' may, to some degree, have neglected this brilliant, unsettling and tragically foreshortened body of work, but they have not betrayed it.
''Sylvia'' 
~
Gus Van Sant's new film, the unusual and remarkable ''Elephant,'' has a premise so simple that in the abstract it borders on the banal. Plotless and stubbornly resistant to conventional narrative structure, the movie has its camera follow students around the halls and grounds of a high school in Portland, Ore., for a day, until violence erupts. ''Elephant,'' which has its premiere tonight at the New York Film Festival and opens commercially on Oct. 24, is the director's take on the murders that took place at Columbine High School.
The title comes from the British director Alan Clarke's 1989 rough-and-ready short film of the same name, a tough and dense look at the violence in Northern Ireland, which also didn't paste answers onto the problem. Mr. Clarke's short outraged or absorbed viewers in the way that Mr. Van Sant's movie, which won the Palme d'Or at Cannes, is likely to do. (Mr. Clarke's title referred to the aphorism about the elephant in the living room that goes ignored -- a problem that people refuse to face for so long that they are no longer even able to see it.)
This new ''Elephant'' will also confound people looking for solutions or villains, because it doesn't supply them. There's no narrator perched omnisciently over the events, nor the kinds of exaggerated melodramatics and pop music that teen movies employ to insistently nag at emotions. There are few recognizable actors, since Mr. Van Sant populated the movie with kids who had never acted before, heightening the realism and the tension.
''Elephant'' is a formalist exercise with real affection for the kids -- like the photographer Elias (Elias McConnell), who assuredly slips through the school while grabbing shots of his friends or whatever catches his eye. Elias has a lazy, physical confidence, and his natural charisma is emphasized by the chilled-out immediacy of the camerawork. And the young actor's star quality becomes part of the filmmaker's misdirecting our attention, too: since Mr. McConnell holds the camera like a protagonist, we're lulled into thinking the film is his story.
His being a photographer would be a cheap way into the movie, which Mr. Van Sant rejects. Instead, the camera floats from one life to another, flirting with Michelle (Kristen Hicks), a loner with a plaintive face who doesn't fit in with the other girls. She takes us to the climactic scenes.
The cinematographer Harris Savides summons all of his talents to romanticize the naturalism, yet the constant movement and long takes aren't petty virtuosity. This skill is a part of what was once considered directing -- an evenhandedness that we become accustomed to quickly. The camera darts through extended scenes filmed in one take, like charting the action in a high school cafeteria that ends in a dark clichéd joke: a gaggle of young divas matter-of-factly head to the bathroom to purge.
Mr. Savides's work has a low-keyed brilliance, demonstrating that a master's work needn't be showy. His résumé includes filming Calvin Klein commercials, and ''Elephant'' sometimes circles the willowy, young male hunks as if they were on a candy dish. (The sound design by Leslie Shatz adds to the reality, with the pinging, echoey ambient noises of a school that create a lingering sense of dread in those halls.)
''Elephant'' blends the warm-hearted randomness of the Hungarian filmmaker Bela Tarr's movies with the familial offhandedness of Rainer Werner Fassbinder and the minimal realism of the documentarian Frederick Wiseman -- yet the influences are not arch film-grammar quotations crying to be spotted. Mr. Van Sant knows the subject matter will increase the audience's attention.
The movie is also a departure from the director's career streak of films along the lines of ''Good Will Hunting'' that dramatize aimless young men whose lives seem like dented cans. Instead, Mr. Van Sant gives ''Elephant'' a spartan yet elusive life by shifting the film's focus from one group of students to another; the camera actually drifts like a bored high school student.
The presentation is partly attributable to the fact that this picture was made for a premiere on HBO and the filmmaker decided against the wide-screen formatting that many directors select for made-for-television projects. ''Elephant'' even looks like the kind of film you'd see projected in a high school. It's framed like a box, which gives the movie the illusory, numbed lack of import of a driver's-ed instructional film, until it moves from pedestrian normality to being drenched with the aftermath of violence.
Unlike Michael Moore's documentary ''Bowling for Columbine,'' which was suffused with an angry man's frustration and passion -- he demanded that we absorb, and act on what he had concluded -- the distanced view of ''Elephant'' is deceptively calming. It starts with a car roaming down a street and slowly weaving out of control, sideswiping the parked cars in its path. We overhear the voice of an outraged teenage boy, and immediately have our expectations thwarted. The boy, John (John Robinson) -- a lanky waif with hair that looks as if it came off a L'Oréal box -- pops out of the car and shouts at the driver, his drunken father (Timothy Bottoms).
The movie builds anecdotally toward the violent climax, arriving at the homes of the killers, Alex (Alex Frost) and Eric (Eric Deulen), a pair of outsiders who spend time together compulsively in the way high-school boys do, something that can lead cruel peers to hiss about their love lives. Mr. Van Sant reinforces such attitudes by having the boys kiss each other before they pack their bags and head off to their awful mission -- an ambiguous scene that could be sexual or a proud Viking moment before leaving home.
Unfortunately, Mr. Van Sant also takes an easy way out in one instance. The boy assassins order their weapons through the Internet, something that is not only hard to do but also robs the entire movie of the plausibility that most of ''Elephant'' contains.
But the rest of the film more than compensates for this -- especially a moment where a muscular, imposing young African-American, Benny (Bennie Dixon), wanders into the frame like a hero -- a touch that mixes reality with another film cliché: the sacrificial black man.
And by the end of the movie, we realize where much of the power and clarity of the film comes from. By making the camera an observer, we get a perspective that often comes out of horror movies, a choice that whips the ordinary with the terrifying, an unforgettable mix.
''Elephant'' 
~
Between a lethargic trailer propped up by ''Gimme Some Lovin' '' and the mainstream-sentimentalist producer Brian (''A Beautiful Mind'') Grazer's name on the credits, there's plenty of reason for an involuntary recoil toward the Coen Brothers' fearsomely titled new movie, ''Intolerable Cruelty.'' But the film is not shudder-worthy. Instead, it's something not seen in movie theaters for a long time: an intelligent, modern screwball comedy, a minor classic on the order of competent, fast-talking curve balls about deception and greed like Mitchell Leisen's ''Easy Living'' and Billy Wilder's ''Major and the Minor.''
This film -- from material by Robert Ramsey, Matthew Stone and John Romano that the Coens reworked a bit -- has the kind of swift, smart farcical writing that has actually found a snugger nest in television series comedy than in theaters. (Yet the movie takes a shot at television by hoisting a slickster reality-show producer, played by Geoffrey Rush, on something like his own petard.)
''Intolerable Cruelty,'' which opens nationwide today, shares something with comedic entries in the Coen canon like ''The Big Lebowski'' and ''Raising Arizona'': a full-blooded movie-star performance to get it squarely into the strike zone. This time the good work comes from George Clooney, who happens to have the Art Deco profile fit for a 1930's comedy. He scores with his willingness to mock his above-average charisma level and the chiseled chin, cover-guy good looks that make him seem as if he were sketched by Mort Drucker and inked by Chester Gould.
Mr. Clooney's gift of gab is perfectly suited for his role as the crème de la crème of divorce lawyers Miles Massey. The movie introduces Miles by focusing in on his constantly moving mouth as he absently barks instructions on his cell phone, while getting a teeth-whitening job that makes his choppers so pearly they look like paint samples for refrigerator surfaces.
He is so self-possessed a winner that his larynx is on autopilot. This is made clear in a laugh-rich divorce-court scene early on: what looks like an intense whispered case discussion between the lead lawyer, Miles, and his second chair, Wrigley (Paul Adelstein), instead turns out to be a glorious summary of Miles's fatuousness.
Miles has everything but a soul, though he doesn't actually look as if he'd require one. And the babe he falls for isn't exactly the girl to give him one either. Marylin (Catherine Zeta-Jones), as delectable as a white-chocolate Easter Bunny, has been tagged for a vicious divorce by her serial-adulterer husband, Rex Rexroth (Edward Herrmann), after she catches him cheating.
She's the wronged party, which makes her all the more attractive to Miles. Though it doesn't make her so hot that he refuses to take her on in court, and he defuses the parries of her lawyer, Freddy Bender (the always reliable Richard Jenkins), like a pipe bomb in a Richard Donner movie. ''Struggle, challenge and the ultimate destruction of your opponent -- that's life,'' Miles sighs contentedly.
Marylin may be the victim in this case, but she's no innocent. And when she jabs a No. 2 pencil into Miles's heart by showing up with her Texas millionaire beau, Howard D. Doyle (Billy Bob Thornton), who's so flashy he seems to have stepped out of a 1950's stage musical, Miles is horrified -- but not defeated. He is now determined to win her over. That's what makes the picture work so beautifully. It's a movie about underhanded professionals by filmmakers -- the director Joel Coen and the producer Ethan Coen, and probably to some extent, Mr. Grazer -- who delight in the epitome of criminal enterprise. There's more shadiness here than in all of Vermont in October.
Ms. Zeta-Jones's performance complements Mr. Clooney's with a perfidious elegance. Her uptown-girl beauty and silken opacity -- that ability to not let on what she's thinking, even to herself -- make her the kind of trophy Miles would want to own. And she coos so lushly that Marylin's hand-tailored cool is even more beguiling: she knows advertising that she's an opportunist is a bad way to conduct business, which in her case is finding rich-husband material.
That joy in low-down behavior is kept on the down-low. Cedric the Entertainer plays a crass, but direct, video surveillance expert, Gus Petch, who becomes the point of intersection in the world of Miles and Marylin. Cedric delivers the crassest lines with what can only be called hammy understatement; his years of stand-up have taught him that less is all. The picture lacks the manic, red-line highs that make for great trailers and ragged films. It's not the kind of dark comedy that Mr. Grazer has produced previously -- like ''Greedy'' and ''For Love or Money'' -- that finally soften the characters' acquisitive behavior with a fatty dollop of sentimental mayonnaise.
The Coens, bless their hearts, are too smart to apologize for avarice -- it's what gave screwball comedies a kick, and sends this movie straight to your head. Keep in mind that it's only a minor rush, but a rush nonetheless. It has a Jell-O-shot smoothness that makes you a little dizzy afterward in recollecting how assured and unremittingly smart ''Intolerable Cruelty'' is. The second word in the title is a little too apt; this movie should pack a license to kill.
''Intolerable Cruelty'' 
~
The clearest path toward understanding Lars von Trier, whose three-hour quasi-Christian allegory, ''Dogville,'' is certain to divide audiences into passionate champions and hissing naysayers, is to accept that he is a ruthless provocateur with a practical joker's sensibility.
Unlike most serious filmmakers who demand your trust, Mr. von Trier solicits it with a supercilious smirk, then mocks your emotional expectations with a teasing ambiguity. Alfred Hitchcock, who's also been accused of sadism, played tricks that tickled. Mr. von Trier wants his to leave a sting, along with the uneasy suspicion that he's played you for a fool.
''Dogville,'' which has the first of two New York Film Festival screenings tonight, has the outlines of a savage Brechtian deconstruction of ''Our Town.'' While you watch the movie, it can seem ridiculously long-winded (especially near the end, when James Caan appears as a mobster in a black sedan). But once it's over, its characters' miserable faces remain etched in your memory, and its cynical message lingers.
As a contemptuous, nose-thumbing expression of this Danish director's misanthropy, the movie is relentlessly true to its hateful vision, depicting as a lie the ideal of embracing human community (and especially the cozy, cookie-baking dream of small-town America). The only true solidarity to be found in any group, it proposes, is through vengeful, xenophobic mob violence.
Because most people automatically flinch at such misanthropy, ''Dogville,'' which concludes that people are no better (and probably worse) than dogs, faces a dim commercial future. Set during the Depression in Dogville, an imaginary American town, it reworks Mr. von Trier's favorite parable of human cruelty -- the persecution and martyrdom of an innocent young woman -- then subjects it to a transcendentally nasty twist.
Unlike the director's earlier variations on the theme, this one doesn't culminate with a comforting peal of celestial bells or a song of faith by an angel facing the electric chair.
Grace (Nicole Kidman), a beautiful stranger running from mobsters, who wanders into Dogville and throws herself on the mercy of the townspeople, doesn't ascend anywhere. Mr. von Trier pulls the rug out from under her by suggesting that retaliation is more satisfying than martyrdom, and asserting that forgiveness is a form of moral arrogance that deserves to be trampled. For those who come to care about Grace, the turnaround is a nasty slap in the face, and the practical joker's final crow of ''what did you expect?''
The Brechtian gap between the audience and what unfolds is much wider in ''Dogville'' than in Mr. von Trier's previous movies because the new film, shot in digital video, all but does away with naturalistic trappings. It takes place on a stage designed as a map, with props and chalk directions indicating place names like Elm Street (although we're told that there are no elms in Dogville). The stage is large enough to accommodate moving cars.
A favorite camera device is to peer down from above to observe the characters (their actions sometimes sped-up) as scurrying ants. Because of the Depression, the town is hopelessly bedraggled, and filming the movie (in bleached-out color) on a stage set has enhanced the claustrophobic ambience.
That Brechtian distance is further widened by the flowery delivery of an unctuous British narrator (John Hurt), who relates the story in a facetious parody of fairy-tale language. Like a storybook, the movie is divided into chapters with explanatory titles.
When Grace arrives in Dogville, she is befriended by Tom Edison (Paul Bettany), a young philosopher, know-it-all and John-Boy Walton type who appoints himself her protector and pleads her case with the townspeople. (Eventually, he and Grace fall in love.) To gain community acceptance, Grace volunteers her labor as Dogville's unpaid housekeeper, gardener, baby sitter, and all-purpose farmhand.
But her neighbors' good will curdles into suspicion and loathing after schoolchildren spot her being raped in an orchard by Chuck (Stellan Skarsgard), an apple farmer who blackmails her into becoming his plaything. Then her life goes swiftly downhill, and she ends up a prisoner and unpaid prostitute, all the while maintaining the vestiges of a misplaced Panglossian faith in her persecutors' underlying humanity.
Among the actors portraying the townspeople, who gather for regular meetings, are Lauren Bacall, Blair Brown, Patricia Clarkson, Jeremy Davies, Ben Gazzara, Chloë Sevigny and Philip Baker Hall. They make up an ominously mean-spirited ensemble, ruled by fear, greed, lust and envy.
Ms. Kidman's Grace (sweetly underplayed) is an angel of compassion and charity who forgives their rudeness and excuses their sins. Her sin (in their eyes) is to act as if she's better than other people. And one of the movie's most unsettling notions is that good people are resented for their virtue. And because they make everyone around them feel even worse about themselves, they need to be taught a lesson.
A lot of fuss has been made about Mr. von Trier's supposed anti-Americanism. (He has never visited this country.) It seems to me that this showy stance is more a provocative maneuver than a hardened prejudice. As long as the United States is touted as the promised land whose streets are paved with gold, its myths are ripe for puncture. We ought to be able to stand it.
DOGVILLE
Written and directed by Lars von Trier; director of photography, Anthony Dod Mantle; edited by Molly Malene Stensgaard; production designer, Peter Grant; produced by Vibeke Windelov; released by Lions Gate Films. Running time: 177 minutes. This film is not rated. Shown tonight at 8:30 P.M. and Sunday at 4:30 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, as part of the 41st New York Film Festival.
WITH: Nicole Kidman (Grace), Harriet Andersson (Gloria), Lauren Bacall (Ma Ginger), Jean-Marc Barr (the Man With the Big Hat), Paul Bettany (Tom Edison), Blair Brown (Mrs. Henson), James Caan (the Big Man), Patricia Clarkson (Vera), Jeremy Davies (Bill Henson), Ben Gazzara (Jack McKay), Philip Baker Hall (Tom Edison Sr.), Siobhan Fallon Hogan (Martha), John Hurt (Narrator), Zeljko Ivanek (Ben), Chloë Sevigny (Liz Henson), Udo Kier (the Man in the Coat) and Stellan Skarsgard (Chuck).

~
Directed by David Leland
Not rated, 96 minutes
The sweet, solemn music of George Harrison, who died two years ago, has rarely sounded more majestic than in the sweeping performances of the enlarged star-studded band that gathered in London at Royal Albert Hall on Nov. 29 to commemorate his legacy. And ''Concert for George,'' David Leland's moving documentary of that event, mirrors the elegiac happy-sad quality of music that distilled the more spiritually heady aspirations of a segment of old-time hippie culture.
Revisited three decades after most of them first appeared, Harrison's best-known songs, which adapted the mantric drone and modal angularity of Hindu devotion into highly melodic pop, have an inescapably nostalgic ring. Nowadays that kind of incense-flavored dreaminess has been swept to the farthest margins of contemporary pop.
Harrison believed that music was a universal language that could bridge cultures and potentially heal the world. Even his lighter songs often had a hybrid East-West flavor emanating from Harrison's slide guitar, which echoed the sitar of his mentor Ravi Shankar.
Most of Harrison's best-known songs are included in the film, which opens today nationwide, among them ''If I Needed Someone,'' ''Taxman,'' ''Isn't It a Pity,'' ''Something,'' ''Beware of Darkness,'' ''All Things Must Pass,'' ''My Sweet Lord'' and ''While My Guitar Gently Weeps.'' They're interspersed (and sometimes interrupted) by the terse but affectionate reminiscences of the musical guests, most of whom were his lifelong friends. Eric Clapton, the concert's musical director and dignified M.C., is lead vocalist and guitarist on several numbers. Joining him are Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Tom Petty, Jeff Lynne and Billy Preston, among others.
The Monty Python troupe, who Harrison believed inherited the spirit of the Beatles after their breakup, appear in costume to perform ''The Lumberjack Song,'' the troupe's comic ode to macho cross-dressers, with Tom Hanks in the supporting chorus line of Canadian Mounties. Later in the concert, Mr. Shankar, now frail, dedicates a short composition, ''Arpan,'' to Harrison, whom he remembers as being like a son.
The reminiscences are upbeat and playful. Mr. Petty recalls how the Traveling Wilburys' song ''Handle With Care'' was written by committee in Bob Dylan's garage, with one member after another of the one-shot supergroup taking turns throwing out lines. Sir Paul recalls Harrison's fondness for the ukulele and leads off a rendition of ''Something'' on the uke that later segues into a fuller orchestral arrangement.
But the concert's most joyful moment is Mr. Starr's rousing version of ''Photograph,'' the 1973 hit he wrote with Mr. Harrison, which prompts the entire audience to sing along. The moment is a poignant reminder of the communal ideals that the Beatles (together and separately) embodied for a generation now entering its 50's. But even at the height of it all, Mr. Harrison saw beyond Beatlemania and pop stardom when he asserted, in a tone of acceptance rather than bitterness, ''All things must pass.''
STEPHEN HOLDEN

~
Forget all that touchy-feely blather about getting in touch with your wounded inner child. The irresistibly good-natured comedy ''School of Rock'' proposes a far bolder and more playful path toward self-realization. It imagines that deep in the soul of every child, parent and even the crustiest school principal a suppressed rock 'n' roll maniac is clamoring for release. Or as this movie's resident doctor of rock liberation announces to a group of shy fifth graders, rock 'n' roll is about ''sticking it to the man.''
What child could resist that urge when the self-appointed healer unlocking that inner rocker is as lovable (if exasperating) as Dewey Finn (Jack Black), a rotund, wild-eyed heavy-metal guitarist? Dewey has just been kicked out of the band he helped found for being an obnoxious, egomaniacal jerk. In a desperate scheme to come up with the rent money, Dewey passes himself off as a substitute teacher at Horace Green prep, an academically snooty private school for the offspring of yuppies.
Facing a classroom of 10-year-old goody-goodies whose achievements are measured in gold stars, Dewey is flabbergasted when his students cite Christina Aguilera, the musical ''Annie'' and Liza Minnelli as their musical influences and claim total ignorance of Dewey's personal hard-rock pantheon. He immediately undertakes a drastic re-education program to indoctrinate his students in the gospel according to Led Zeppelin and the Ramones. Dewey's crash course involves doing as well as listening. In a matter of weeks he transforms a class of pint-size nerds into a hard-driving band named School of Rock, which struts all the right defiant poses as it blasts out power chords.
The movie, which opens nationally today, is a very funny for-kids-of-all-ages delight that should catapult Mr. Black straight to the top of the A-list of Hollywood funnymen. Not since Jim Carrey twitched, mugged and leered his way to the head of the class has a comic actor stirred up such a gleeful furor on the screen. And not since John Belushi has one used the anarchic roar of rock as a conceptual platform.
It helps that Mr. Black, who made such a vivid impression as a music-obsessed record store clerk in ''High Fidelity,'' is a real musician as well as a comic live wire. His musically savvy caricature of a rock 'n' roll wild man infuses real passion into the movie, which was directed by Richard Linklater from a screenplay by Mike White (who also plays a small role). The idea of rock as an unstoppable, democratizing cultural force may be half a century old, but recycled with this much enthusiasm and expertise, it can still convey a buzz of exhilaration.
''School of Rock'' is the first mainstream comedy directed by Mr. Linklater (''Waking Life,'' ''Before Sunrise''), who demonstrates an unerring sense of where to draw the line. Had it become any cuter, this film might have turned into a squishy clone of ''The Bad News Bears.'' Had it been any smarter, it might have seemed too esoteric for a mass audience. (Its encyclopedic knowledge of rock lineage is the only overtly scholarly thing about it.) Were it any raunchier, it would have risked losing its family-friendly PG-13 rating. (The fifth graders may wear spiky postpunk hairstyles, but they are not plunged, or even tempted to plunge, into a netherworld of drugs and sex.)
Mr. Linklater, who directed the underappreciated rock-driven high school movie ''Dazed and Confused'' 10 years ago, recognizes that for most Americans between 15 and 50, American history and rock history are virtually synonymous. But the movie is not entirely adult-friendly. Instead of touting parental rock favorites like the Beatles, Bob Dylan and the Eagles, its heart belongs to the cruder stuff: the raw, pumping charge of AC/DC and Metallica.
Dewey's problems begin the day he is fired by his band and threatened with eviction by Patty (Sarah Silverman), the bossy shrew who has taken over the life of his nerdy roommate, Ned (Mr. White). When Ned, who has given up rock 'n' roll to work as a substitute teacher, receives an emergency cry for help from the Horace Green School, Dewey happens to take the call and impulsively impersonates his roommate to apply for the job.
The mousy school principal who hires him, Rosalie Mullins (Joan Cusack), is a model of nervous rectitude behind whose spectacles flashes a tiny glint of rebellion. But as it turns out, two sips of beer are all it takes to unleash Rosalie's inner Stevie Nicks.
Dewey's master plan is to mold the students into a self-contained rock band, and to carry it off he dreams up a role for every fifth grader. Those who are not musicians design lights, costumes and sound, or serve as roadies. Under Dewey's impassioned tutelage it takes only a few plugged-in twangs for the lead guitarist, Zack (Joey Gaydos Jr.), to catch the spirit; and when the geeky keyboardist, Lawrence (Robert Tsai), finds a groove, he stops feeling like a hopeless outsider.
Tomika (Maryam Hassan), a shy backup singer, begins to blossom the moment she discovers her inner Aretha. The students are adorable, with just enough backbone to keep from melting into icky Hollywood moppets.
Rehearsals take place during school hours while a lookout monitors a surveillance camera that spots approaching school officials. When one appears the class switches into a ludicrous pretense of earnest historical discussion. The project culminates in a Battle of the Bands that has all the hoopla of a ''Rocky'' prizefight.
''School of Rock'' doesn't try to convince us that any of this is real or even remotely possible. A shaggy loudmouth like Dewey could never talk his way into a substitute teaching job. The molding of a fifth-grade class into a well-oiled rock machine in a few weeks is also inconceivable, as is the notion that it could be done in secret under the principal's nose.
Arriving at a moment when hip-hop has superseded rock as the dominant commercial music, ''School of Rock'' feels a little déjà vu. ''School of Rock'' is really a comic postscript to the rock revolution. A 21st-century ''Rock Around the Clock,'' it longs for the combative spirit of those good old days before Beethoven decided to roll over and tell Tchaikovsky the news.
''School of Rock'' 
~
At the beginning of Clint Eastwood's mighty ''Mystic River,'' which will open the New York Film Festival tonight and be released nationwide on Wednesday, the camera drifts down from its aerial survey of Boston and alights in a nondescript blue-collar neighborhood of triple-decker wood-frame houses and scuffed-up sidewalks. A couple of dads sit on a back porch drinking beer and talking about the Red Sox, who are in the midst of their ill-starred 1975 season, while three boys -- Dave Boyle, Jimmy Markum and Sean Devine -- play hockey in the street below.
The somber music (composed by Mr. Eastwood) and the shadows that flicker in the hard, washed-out New England light create an atmosphere of impending danger, which arrives soon enough as a dark sedan pulls up and then drives away with Dave in the back.
Dave's abduction is an act of inexplicable, almost metaphysical evil, and this story of guilt, grief and vengeance grows out of it like a mass of dark weeds. At its starkest, the film, like the novel by Dennis Lehane on which it is based, is a parable of incurable trauma, in which violence begets more violence and the primal violation of innocence can never be set right. ''Mystic River'' is the rare American movie that aspires to -- and achieves -- the full weight and darkness of tragedy.
Mr. Eastwood and his screenwriter, Brian Helgeland, have also been faithful to the sense of place that makes Mr. Lehane's book a superior piece of crime fiction. Much of the dialogue has been plucked directly from the pages of the book, and it retains the salty, fatalistic tang of the ungentrified streets of Irish-Catholic Boston.
A quarter-century after the kidnapping, Dave, Sean and Jimmy have settled into ordinary adult lives of compromise and disappointment. Sean (Kevin Bacon) works in the homicide division of the Massachusetts State Police. His wife has left him but still calls him on his cellphone and remains silent while he stammers questions and half-hearted apologies.
Jimmy (Sean Penn), whose first wife died while he was serving a prison sentence for robbery, has remarried; with visible effort, he has reinvented himself as a responsible citizen, running a small grocery store in his old neighborhood. Dave (Tim Robbins), who walks with the shuffling, stoop-shouldered gait of a timid, overgrown child, has a son of his own and a skittish, devoted wife named Celeste (Marcia Gay Harden).
Celeste and Annabeth (Laura Linney), Jimmy's second wife, are cousins, and though ''Mystic River'' takes place in a modern American city, it is as thoroughly steeped in tribal codes of kinship, blood and honor as a Shakespeare play or a John Ford western.
Everyone seems to be nursing a dark secret or an ulterior motive, and each emerges slowly into the light in the wake of a second senseless crime, the murder of Jimmy's 19-year-old daughter, Katie (Emmy Rossum). Because Katie's body was found in a park that lies within state jurisdiction, the case falls to Sean and his partner, Whitey Powers (Laurence Fishburne), and their investigation sets every sleeping dog in the neighborhood howling.
Suspicion falls on Katie's boyfriend, Brendan Harris (Thomas Guiry), whose family is connected to Jimmy through an obscure underworld vendetta, and also on Dave, who saw Katie in a bar the night she was killed and who came home late with blood on his clothes.
As with most murder mysteries, the densely woven narrative of ''Mystic River'' is a skein of coincidences and somewhat implausible connections. What gives the movie its extraordinary intensity of feeling is the way Mr. Eastwood grounds the conventions of pulp opera in an unvarnished, thickly inhabited reality. There are scenes that swell with almost unbearable feeling, and the director's ambitions are enormous, but the movie almost entirely avoids melodrama or grandiosity.
Mr. Eastwood has found actors who can bear the weight and illuminate the abyss their characters inhabit. Mr. Penn, his eyes darting as if in anticipation of another blow, his shoulders tensed to return it, is almost beyond praise. Jimmy Markum is not only one of the best performances of the year, but also one of the definitive pieces of screen acting in the last half-century, the culmination of a realist tradition that began in the old Actor's Studio and begat Brando, Dean, Pacino and De Niro.
But Mr. Penn, as gifted and disciplined as any of his precursors, makes them all look like, well, actors. He has purged his work of any trace of theatricality or showmanship while retaining all the directness and force that their applications of the Method brought into American movies.
The clearest proof of his achievement may be that, as overpowering as his performance is, it never overshadows the rest of the cast. This tragedy, after all, is not individual but communal, even though each character must bear it alone. Mr. Bacon, even-keeled and self-effacing, is superb, as is Mr. Fishburne, whose humor and skepticism keep the movie from being swallowed up in gloom. Whitey (whose nickname has survived the racial transformation of his character from page to screen) is the only major character who is not implicated in the tribal history of the neighborhood, and his jokes and observations are reminders of the wider world.
Mr. Robbins, in some ways, faces the greatest challenge, since he must play a man whose damaged personality is an unstable alloy of vulnerability and violence, naïveté and cunning. You want to feel sorry for him, but he also scares you. Which is the effect he has on Celeste, who provides the film's most haunting image of terror and heartbreak, just as Annabeth, emerging from the shadows near the end, articulates with frightening clarity the ruthlessness that passes, in this fallen world, for justice.
The twists of plot that every good thriller needs are also, in this case, revelations of character. The jolts of surprise you feel when crucial bits of information are disclosed are nothing compared to the shock of seeing who people really are, and what they are capable of doing in the name of love, loyalty or self-preservation.
When Sean realizes he must tell his old friend Jimmy that his beloved daughter is dead, he wonders what he should say: ''God said you owed another marker, and he came to collect.''
This grim theology is as close as anyone comes to faith, but Mr. Eastwood's understanding of the universe, and of human nature, is if anything even more pessimistic. The evil of murderers and child molesters represents a fundamental imbalance in the order of things that neither the forces of law and order nor the impulse toward vengeance can rectify. Dave, looking back on his ordeal, describes himself as ''the boy who escaped from wolves,'' and his flight is accompanied by noises that sound like the howls of wild animals. The actions of his abusers spring from some bestial, uncivilized impulse that cries out to be exterminated.
The problem -- the tragedy -- is that grief, loyalty and even love spring from the same source. When Jimmy learns that he has lost the child who saved his life by forcing him into responsibility, he rages like a rabid beast, and you know his fury will only lead to more hurt. ''We bury our sins, and wash them clean,'' he declares later on as he prepares to enact his vengeance, but this is wishful thinking, mere sentiment, and you suspect that Jimmy knows it. Mr. Eastwood surely does.
''Mystic River'' 
~
The director Sofia Coppola's new comic melodrama, ''Lost in Translation,'' thoroughly and touchingly connects the dots between three standards of yearning in movies: David Lean's ''Brief Encounter,'' Richard Linklater's ''Before Sunrise'' and Wong Kar-wei's ''In the Mood for Love.'' All three movies are, in their way, about a moment of evanescence that fades before the participants' eyes -- as is ''Translation.'' (''Translation'' also exhibits the self-contained, stylized lonesomeness found in post-punk, like New Order's ''Bizarre Love Triangle.'')
Ms. Coppola's movie also happens to be hilarious -- a paean to dislocated people discovering how alive they are when they can barely keep their eyes open. The sexiness comes from the busy, desperate need-to-impress heat of a flirtation, an unrequited love communicated through a filter of sleep deprivation.
''Translation,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is also one of the purest and simplest examples ever of a director falling in love with her star's gifts. And never has a director found a figure more deserving of her admiration than Bill Murray. He plays a vodka-and-bitters version of himself and the persona that made him famous. His character, Bob, is an American movie star who is in Tokyo to participate in the celebrity not-so-secret shame: he's picking up a boatload of dough to perform in commercials for Suntory whiskey. He arrives in Japan just in time to gaze, slightly embarrassed, at the sullen billboards of himself that are starting to appear there. While blinking sleeplessly around the lobby of the majestically hermetic Tokyo Hyatt, he meets Charlotte (Scarlett Johansson), who has been abandoned by her photographer husband (Giovanni Ribisi); he's off shooting a band.
The movie follows the twists and connections in Bob and Charlotte's relationship -- like some trans-Atlantic phone calls, their feelings reach each other on a five-second delay. The lag time only embellishes the comedy, and the heartbreak.
It's the first grown-up starring part that Mr. Murray has had, and he inflects every facet of public awareness of Bill Murray with a sure, beveled determination. That may be because he has never really had a leading role that has asked him simply to pay attention to the other actors instead of guide the scene or save it.
Lean and physically witty -- because he has dropped the awareness of the audience's demand for mainstream comedy -- he even seems to be standing taller, perched on Bob's courtliness. Generally, Mr. Murray has given performances worth paying attention to in movies that no one sees, like his physical inhabitation of Hunter S. Thompson in ''Where the Buffalo Roam,'' perhaps the only film example extant of Mr. Murray's ability to depict vulnerability and physical threat simultaneously.
Here he supplies the kind of performance that seems so fully realized and effortless that it can easily be mistaken for not acting at all. The corollary of this is that Ms. Coppola's direction is so breezily assured in its awareness of loneliness that the film could potentially be dismissed as self-consciously moody rather than registering as a mood piece. But it's bound to be recognized as a movie worthy of the kind of Oscar attention occasionally given to films that challenge audiences subtly. Mr. Murray could collect the Academy Award that he didn't get for ''Rushmore.''
Here, his capacity for absorbing everything around him has taken a toll, and the visibility of that burden is what ''Translation'' is all about. The psychodrama in the phone calls from Bob's wife adds a chilling layer of passive-aggressive horror that makes you understand why he had to flee to Tokyo. But thanks to Ms. Coppola's gracefulness, those conversations don't overwhelm the movie; instead, they add texture.
As does Ms. Johansson's Charlotte. At 18, the actress gets away with playing a 25-year-old woman by using her husky voice to test the level of acidity in the air. Charlotte's husband has already stopped listening to her, and we can see that her pain is dulled by her exhaustion level. Ms. Johansson is not nearly as accomplished a performer as Mr. Murray, but Ms. Coppola gets around this by using Charlotte's simplicity and curiosity as keys to her character.
Being shut away from experience has made Charlotte even lonelier than Bob, and their relationship flowers because he is eager for experience, too. Ms. Coppola gives Mr. Murray a scene that actors dream of; he falls definitively for Charlotte as she struggles through a karaoke version of ''Brass in Pocket,'' a wisp of a smile flitting across his face as he watches her perform in a frosting-pink wig. She is his dream of an uncomplicated future, and Ms. Coppola lovingly shoots Ms. Johansson's wary, lazy eyes and lush lips -- almost as a parody of Japanimation.
Music is a big part of the director's life; Ms. Coppola's previous feature, a screen adaptation of ''The Virgin Suicides,'' was informed more substantially by the score by the group Air than by the narrative. She also allows Bob a chance to croon some karaoke, including a cover of Roxy Music's ''More Than This.''
Certainly we anticipate Mr. Murray's trashy sarcasm when he steps in front of a microphone, but we cringe slightly; if he whips Bryan Ferry's doomed narcissism around his throat like a scarf, the kind of thing he did when he invented this routine in the late 1970's on ''Saturday Night Live,'' he'll get his laugh and demolish the movie. Instead he renders the song with a goofy delicacy; his workingman's suavity and generosity carry the day. And ''Translation'' already has a joke of a hotel lounge singer, played by Catherine Lambert, who is used for a bigger laugh later.
A joy of filmmaking pervades the movie, and an instinctive understanding of the medium is evident. Sound is used so beautifully it takes your breath away; in a scene where Bob carries the dozing Charlotte to her room, the hotel corridor is gently dusted with aural density; the noise of air conditioners and fluorescent lights becomes a part of the milieu.
The director is more than ably complemented by her sound designer, Richard Beggs, as well as the cinematographer Lance Acord and the editor Sarah Flack. All of their skills can be glimpsed in a scene that ends with Bob and Charlotte fleeing a karaoke bar as a friend fires a toy pistol that shoots lighted pellets at them, the gun's rat-a-tat fading into the jangling of a pachinko parlor.
The movie conveys dislocation and the hungers it causes more than just visually. Perhaps because of that, ''Translation'' exists more as a film rendering psychological colorations than as a script. Obviously, Ms. Coppola placed all her trust in her actors. Anna Faris, who barely registers in the ''Scary Movie'' pictures -- and she's the star -- comes to full, lovable and irritating life as a live-wire starlet complicating Charlotte's life. Ms. Faris has already had work; this movie will secure her a career.
But as a result of Ms. Coppola's faith, this is really Mr. Murray's movie, and his respect for his director couldn't be more visible.
In the handful of films she has done -- including her short, ''Lick the Star'' -- Ms. Coppola has shown an interest in emotional way stations. Her characters are caught between past and future -- lost in transition. Perhaps her films are a kind of ongoing metaphorical autobiography, but no matter. The important point is that there's a lot up there on the screen, plenty to get lost in.
''Lost in Translation'' 
~
The panic in the eyes of Tracy (Evan Rachel Wood), the barely teenage protagonist of ''Thirteen,'' will stay with you for a very long time. Both her fear and pleasure -- since they are inextricably entwined -- are almost always visible, especially in a harrowing scene about loss of control that is a pinnacle of performance. Tracy and her new best friend, Evie (Nikki Reed), try to lure a 20-something neighbor (Kip Pardue) into a threesome. With a hollow fervor Tracy goes through the motions of what she thinks she should be doing, imitating Evie's lead. Tracy's ferocious appetite gives this story of a 13-year-old girl's extended period of debauchery and misery a magnetic volatility; she moves through this mess slightly startled, as if she were trapped in a waking nightmare.
''Thirteen,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, treats Tracy's behavior as a fever dream, something viral. This disease eating up her empathy and decency is what she picked up from the effortlessly cool Evie, also 13, who crashes into Tracy's life and plucks her from an existence of more age-appropriate fixations, like Barbie dolls. Evie, with the physical confidence of a much older girl, knows exactly how to devastate Tracy; she breezily drops hints that she thinks her new friend is immature. Essentially, it's the way cult leaders work on a psychological Achilles' heel. And as Evie plies her skills on the desperate and impressionable Tracy, one thing comes to mind: Evie must have experienced this same tragedy, and is simply spreading the contagion to the next victim in the biosphere.
So anxious to be grown up we can almost smell it in her sweat, Tracy adopts the new life of makeup, halter tops and shoplifting, because she feels it adds years to her and provides an immediate adrenaline spike she gets hooked on. As Evie takes Tracy under her broken wing to remake her, we feel we're watching Tracy undergo the initiations of a new tribe. (The movie could be called ''Prey'' because it's the way Evie -- who lives nearly unsupervised with a haggard, alcoholic mother played by the normally healthy and strapping Deborah Kara Unger -- seems to view Tracy.)
The closest ''Thirteen'' comes to a narrative is in following its young central figure straying into sex, drugs and alienation and her sudden detachment from her struggling single mother, Melanie (Holly Hunter). The movie has the ebb and flow that come from material structured as a series of anecdotes -- it doesn't build, and sometime feels as cluttered as a 13-year-old's bedroom. But that may be a byproduct of Catharine Hardwicke, making her directorial debut, working to layer incidents that are as far as possible from the weary set of clichés that inform pictures about teenagers. Usually, the protagonist is the bystander -- in ''Thirteen,'' she's the fuse.
Ms. Hardwicke works from a screenplay she wrote with Ms. Reed, shaped around elements from Ms. Reed's own life. Tracy is acting out a kind of rebellion that doesn't make any sense to her mother. Painfully, it doesn't really seem to make any sense to Tracy, either, but she feels an immediate kinship with Evie, whose life is spinning spectacularly out of control. It's the drop that so thrills Tracy -- the sensation of doing whatever she pleases that both stokes and horrifies her. What we recognize from the stricken look in Melanie's face is the same panic in the eyes -- it's something mother and daughter share, and Ms. Hunter wills this spiritual matchup into existence.
Melanie recognizes what appears to be her child, but doesn't have the tools to get through to her. Tracy is all vivacity looking for boundaries, and Melanie can't provide her daughter with any. Their relationship has been more about acting as friends than parent and offspring, and Melanie's boyfriend (Jeremy Sisto) doesn't have the authority to change anything and doesn't want it.
Evie exerts more control than anyone else in the movie because she'll do and say whatever it takes to get what she wants. She's a master, a child expert of ratiocination.
Tracy, in contrast, vibrates those flashes of rage that erupt from the hearts of young girls growing up without a father in the house -- a boiling mélange of anger and frustration born of what feels like rejection. It's this startlingly realized emotional detail that Ms. Wood is spectacularly equipped to register, a contrast with the serenity she showed in last summer's ''Simone'' and closer to the thin-skinned dreaminess she evinced in the television series ''Once and Again,'' where she played Shane West's little sister. (That show was a gold mine of youthful acting talent; it also featured standout work by Julia Whelan.)
Ms. Wood's performance bounces with mood swings from anxiety to exhilaration in a movie with moments so realistically painted that your eyes will sting from the fumes. Ms. Hardwicke's directing approach echoes the chemical surges of its little-girl star, bounding and lunging as if it were in the back seat of a car hurtling down bumpy roads without a seat belt. Working with the cinematographer Elliot Davis, Ms. Hardwicke obviously chose this unsettled style to evoke Tracy's state of mind. (Some families may see discomforting similarities between their own lives and those depicted in ''Thirteen.'')
The movie flutters above the fine line between drama and exploitation, as did a 2000 film by David D. Williams with a similar theme and also called ''Thirteen.'' A preening vulnerability from teenage actresses is often visible in these films about young girls adrift and heartbreakingly alone even when they travel in a group. In Lawrence Ah Mon's gripping 2000 Hong Kong drama ''Spacked Out,'' the girls still wear Hello Kitty backpacks as they swing their hips with a bravura picked up from music videos and commercials. This demeanor is often called growing up too fast, but it's obvious these girls haven't grown up at all; it's why they cling so tenaciously to tantrums.
Yet amazingly, these movies about teenage girls, confused and rebellious with no focus, give young actresses opportunities to unleash their talents. And in the case of ''Thirteen,'' Evan Rachel Wood's claims our attention.
''Thirteen'' 
~
''From off the streets of Cleveland comes 'American Splendor' '' screams the cover of every issue of the writer Harvey Pekar's surly and open-eyed autobiographical comic-book series. The towering, action-packed logo is a further sardonic comment on the lack of activity in the protagonist's life.
And there's as much at stake in the hilarious, moody and cantankerous film adaptation of ''Splendor'' as there was in this summer's other movies of comic-book antiheroes like ''The Hulk'' and ''The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen.''
Harvey is extraordinary -- by the way, so's the movie, written and directed by Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini -- but he's no gentleman. He actually has a lot more in common with the earliest incarnation of the Hulk as created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby.
That Hulk was a ferocious, gray glob of fury that spent most of his time in a Southwestern cave spouting angrily to his powerless sidekick about a world that refused to understand him. As played by Paul Giamatti, Harvey is a gray wad of anger that spends his time in his cavelike apartment, with shelves sagging under the weight of his collection of record albums and jazz 78's, sputtering to his equally powerless pals about a world that he refuses to understand. Slumped into a posture that's a question mark with a pot belly, Mr. Giamatti is a frustrated tremor, shaking and gesticulating futilely.
His performance gets some of the real Pekar notes just right, including the constant peppering of sentences with ''man,'' like a 50's beat hipster. The writer-directors enliven their picture with devices that supplant the stream-of-consciousness narration that came in the comics. They surround the screen with comic-book frames and boxed text, like the ''1950: Our story begins'' rectangle that hangs like a stalactite from the corner of the screen.
The comic-book visuals also provide the contrast Ms. Berman and Mr. Pulcini use to explain exactly what separates Mr. Pekar's comics from regular super-hero stuff. The filmmakers use the real Mr. Pekar as a narrator initially. (''He's the guy playing me,'' he says in his soft croak. ''But he don't look nothin' like me, but whatever.'')
For a time the film cuts to the real-life Mr. Pekar, fulminating on screen with his friends against a stark white background that suggests the sheets of Bristol board that comics artists use to draw their characters. This sounds like a mocking, distancing device, and in the wrong hands it would be. But Mr. Pekar is as vivid in his way as Mr. Giamatti.
The actual Mr. Pekar is a flinty crank who spouts, while the actors portraying figures from the streets of Cleveland chuckle in disbelief at him and his obsessive, nerdy friends. (The great cast includes Judah Friedlander, who plays Harvey's friend Toby with breathtaking precision; Earl Billings as Mr. Boats, one of Harvey's bellicose, small-minded and larger-than-life co-workers at the Veterans Administration; and Danny Hoch.)
The movie reminds us of the subgenre of out-of-the-mainstream comics films when it introduces Harvey and Robert Crumb (James Urbaniak) to each other. Mr. Crumb went on to illustrate many of the earliest issues of ''American Splendor.'' (Mr. Crumb's drawings are employed on screen, as is the art of several other ''Splendor'' mainstays, including Gary Dunn and Mark Zingarelli.)
''They made a movie about him, too,'' the narration says, though Terry Zwigoff's documentary ''Crumb'' isn't mentioned specifically. Mr. Zwigoff's film of Dan Clowes's ''Ghost World'' is also part of the realm influenced by Mr. Pekar and Mr. Crumb, and it's a droll highlight when these men meet. Crumb ambles up to Harvey, who switches his Jay McShann record from one arm to another to keep it away from Crumb; he's hoarding in plain sight.
As enjoyable as the picture is, you can almost hear the hard-core aficionados of the comics series shifting in their seats, rubbing the backs of their necks as Mr. Pekar does and muttering ''sellout.'' It's true that this isn't the vital, tough-minded Harvey Pekar of the comics, a callus-knuckled autodidact who never played the sap and really was a hipster remnant of the Beat era.
He refused to be beaten down by the melancholy that defined his existence, and this is most accurately reflected in the movie when Harvey meets his romantic match, Joyce Brabner, played with a tart, intriguing directness by Hope Davis that's equal parts Emma Goldman and Olive Oyl -- that is, the Olive Oyl of the comics, not the screaming helpless No. 2 pencil of the cartoons.
Wonderfully, ''Splendor,'' the movie and the comic-book, both take off into the stratosphere when they evoke the teeming, dirty and affectionate rundown life of Elzie Segar's ''Popeye'' comic strips, with their brisk American existentialism. The earliest sections of the movie play as though they have buffed the sharp edges off Harvey. But the filmmakers are trying to set a tone. And even as the Harvey of the opening sections is a likable sad-sack loser, the visual scheme that the filmmakers and their team -- including the production designer Thérèse DePrez and the cinematographer Terry Stacey -- put together shows the oppressive ordinariness that Mr. Pekar had to mine for his stories.
The movie takes place under the sunless skies of Cleveland, a land where bright daylight disappears from about early fall to late spring. The production design achieves the drab pallor through use of dusty brick reds, autumnal browns and oranges and dirty ballpark-mustard yellows: it's a Rust Belt palette.
Film really can't evince the working-class subversion of Mr. Pekar's ''Splendor'' comics, but the movie brings its own take on Harvey's life to the screen. It neither embarrasses nor condescends. And the picture, which opens today in New York, Los Angeles and Cleveland, becomes something richer and fuller when Joyce appears. Harvey has someone to square off with, and her eccentricities complement his. They fight the cramped ceilings of low expectations, and the movie gathers narrative momentum by dramatizing Harvey's battle with cancer, the episode told in ''Our Cancer Year,'' the graphic novel they wrote together.
The movie ties the onset of Harvey's cancer to his calamitous guest spot on the old ''Late Night With David Letterman'' show, using it as a way to explain his fight with the show's host, an incident that denies Harvey's rigidly worked-out politics and also his understanding that he was playing an exaggerated version of himself for Mr. Letterman.
Though the picture has to condense Mr. Pekar's stories, it also depicts an aspect of him as important as his funky irritability. He may not be a genius, but he does have the soul of an artist. The movie uses wonderful pieces of music, from Jay McShann, of course, to the Pretenders -- featuring Ohio's own Chrissie Hynde -- and their ''My City Was Gone'' for a moment of happy intimacy as Harvey and Joyce dance around the house.
Most important, we hear ''Ain't That Peculiar'' twice. The Chocolate Genius cover and Marvin Gaye's vital, jazz-and-gospel-inflected original -- his driving high spirit singing the contradictory ''I don't understand it, baby, it's so strange, sometimes'' -- is the perfect encapsulation of ''American Splendor.''
''American Splendor'' 
~
The new version of ''Freaky Friday'' nudges Mary Rodgers's much-loved 1972 novel of mother-daughter conflict into the modern era and makes a few changes along the way. The daughter, Anna (Lindsay Lohan), is a teenager now, and she inhabits the noisy, bumptious, body-pierced world of contemporary adolescence, speeding through her youth over a power-pop soundtrack and playing lead guitar in a coed garage band. Her mother, Tess (Jamie Lee Curtis), is the very model of modern multitasking maternity, juggling a purse full of cellphones and PDA's along with two children, a busy psychotherapy practice, a doddering dad (Harold Gould) and an impressively patient fiancé (Mark Harmon).
Happily, the director, Mark Waters, and the screenwriters, Heather Hatch and Leslie Dixon, are effortlessly attuned both to the brash bounce of current pop culture and to the wise, impish intergenerational comedy that has made the book a classic (and also inspired a 1976 movie that helped to make Jodie Foster a star). Loud but never coarse, candid without being prurient, ''Freaky Friday,'' which opens nationwide today, is a quick-witted, perfectly modulated family farce with a pair of beautifully matched performances from Ms. Lohan and especially Ms. Curtis, who does some of her best work ever.
Or make that four performances, since the story demands that the two actresses play not only their own characters but each other as well. Anna and Tess are locked in such a spectacular misunderstanding that only supernatural intervention can save them.
In her mother's eyes, Anna is loutish and irresponsible; to her daughter, Tess is an uptight control freak. Their reciprocal and chronic failure of sympathy catches the attention of the owner of a Chinese restaurant, who, over the protests of her own daughter, slips Tess and Anna a pair of magic fortune cookies. The next morning (the Friday in question, with a big test, a big audition and Tess's rehearsal dinner on the schedule) they wake up in each other's bodies.
I must confess to a special fondness for comedies in which the rules of time, space and logic are suspended so that misguided but essentially decent people can straighten themselves out. At bottom, these movies -- which include ''Groundhog Day,'' the many incarnations of ''Heaven Can Wait'' and ''All of Me'' -- are comic fantasies of moral improvement, and ''Freaky Friday'' belongs in their company. The measure of its integrity is that it moves smoothly, convincingly and with minimal self-consciousness from farce to earnest sentiment, earning your tears at the climactic mother-daughter rapprochement because it has treated you so generously to laughter on the way.
Both tears and laughter arise from the writers' canny and unforced understanding of what makes the characters tick. Anna and Tess are recognizable types but also solid, peculiar individuals, something that becomes clear only after their identity swap. Ms. Lohan's natural sullenness turns into primness; her back stiffens and her lips purse as she registers the anxious disapproval of a middle-aged woman for the chaotic youthscape into which she is plunged. Only when Tess is in Anna's body do we see the wistfulness and uncertainty beside her façade of brisk confidence.
Similarly, it is only when Anna is thrown into her mother's unretouched middle-aged person that her fearless, reckless ardor for living comes into full view. Ms. Curtis's performance is a marvel. She does all the necessary slouching, grimacing and gesticulating of course, but there is a verve and conviction here that is downright breathtaking, especially in her scenes with Chad Michael Murray, whose character, a dreamy blond named Jake, is the object of Anna's clear-sighted but nonetheless intoxicating crush (and also the movie's chance to put a sweet new wrinkle into the older-women-with-younger-men theme).
As Jake and Anna -- who he thinks is her mom -- babble about their favorite and least favorite bands, you feel the rush of shared enthusiasm, the giddy sense of possibility and connection that accompanies first love.
Since her character wears no historical costumes and suffers from no debilitating ailment, it is likely that Ms. Curtis will be overlooked when Oscar season rolls around. This is a shame, since it is unlikely that any other actress this year will match the loose, energetic wit she brings to this delightful movie.
''Freaky Friday'' 
~
With ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,'' the writer Steven Knight conjured up a television show with a rugged punch of a title. It encouraged the worst in contestants, daring them to keep their wits about them while competing in a Dutch-oven environment for the possibility of walking home with up to seven figures in newly disposable income.
By contrast, Mr. Knight's script for ''Dirty Pretty Things,'' a swift, tangy drama with an equally terse title, pits London's illegal immigrants against the alluring hope of propriety. There's no lifeline that's a phone call away, either. The immigrants are expendable manpower in the war to man the mops, kitchens and bottom-drawer duties of the world of luxury hotels, where they are unnoticed by the public and underpaid and overworked by their employers.
This understated and sure film, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is set in a world of survivors, a forgotten group of people struggling to bring in enough income so that they don't become disposable. One of them -- the Nigerian Okwe (Chiwetel Ejiofor), who drives a cab and also works as a hotel porter under the large thumb of a smooth-operating night manager named Sneaky (Sergi Lopez) -- seems to be as haunted as he is obsessed.
Portraying Okwe's plight could help to absolve Mr. Knight of the flame-out success of ''Millionaire,'' which placed a planet-sized karmic debt on the writer's shoulders for sparking the reality show glut. This movie is just the opportunity for Mr. Knight to square that account. It is an urban horror story rendered with grim intelligence by the man with the right tools for the job: the British director Stephen Frears.
Okwe, red-eyed and cruising on minimal energy because he works double shifts, is a doctor on the run from his homeland. The movie doesn't elaborate on the troubles that have sent him so far from home; all we really know is that he has left a wife and a daughter behind, and part of his pain comes from pining for them.
That lingering misery is what keeps him safely on the couch of his Turkish roommate, the virginal Senay (Audrey Tautou), refusing to act on the magnetism that keeps her gazing at him adoringly. He's capable of loyalty to the rest of his ad hoc family: Guo Yi (Benedict Wong), a mortuary attendant, and Juliette (Sophie Okonedo), the dangerously close-to-cliché, lovable hooker. The actress's clever portrayal brings shading and warmth to an otherwise stereotyped part.
''Dirty Pretty Things'' suggests a demented sequel to Paul Mazursky's ''Moscow on the Hudson,'' a dog-eared fairy tale in which industry and hard work could deliver refugees from evil, or at least into the middle classes. In ''Dirty Pretty Things,'' diligence is not its own reward. The decent have to fight the treacherous undertow of their employers, as well as opportunistic and predatory immigration agents.
The tactful, adroit Mr. Frears, whose credits include ''The Grifters,'' ''High Fidelity'' and ''Dangerous Liaisons,'' doesn't overemphasize the acrid, fetid atmosphere of hard-working immigrants clambering from one job to the next to stay alive. The spartan, bleary-eyed plainness of the urban landscape of immigrant London makes the film all the more arresting. Mr. Frears's low-key curiosity toward what drives outsiders is a crucial element that lubricates the tough, noir melodramatics of the narrative engine. (It's good to see Mr. Frears reunited with the immensely gifted cinematographer Chris Menges, who adds a funereal grace to the film.)
As businesslike as the immigrants who work several jobs to stay afloat, ''Dirty Pretty Things'' grows grimier and more compelling as it builds a head of steam. The movie gets into gear when Okwe, summoned to clean up a blood-drenched hotel suite, fishes an unusual clog out of the room's toilet: a human heart. Eventually he finds a criminal ring that uses immigrants for body parts; they're organ meat in a butcher's window. And unlike the B-picture hysteria of films from the last few years like ''The Harvest'' (1993) that tried to wring drama from this idea yet underdramatized the surrounding circumstances, ''Dirty Pretty Things'' plays it straight and cool.
And though it has its share of earnest moments, the movie doesn't sink to gaudy moralizing. Mr. Knight's climactic story-beat achieves its purpose with a minimum of fuss, abetted by the elegant thoughtfulness of Mr. Frears and the no-nonsense charisma of Mr. Ejiofor. After watching Mr. Frears ply his refined skills in mainstream studio fare, it's enthralling to see him employ that jazziness to spark his ticking impatience with injustice. This is a return to the dancing sympathy that suffused Mr. Frears's ''My Beautiful Laundrette'' (1985).
This film has a conquering spirit. The dankness is replaced by an optimistic blast of sunlight at the end, a contrast to the earlier lighting dimmed with human misery. Mr. Frears blasts away the blight, though he doesn't have to work to restore Okwe's dignity. It shines through from the start.
''Dirty Pretty Things'' 
~
Rowan Atkinson, the gangly, rubber-faced British comedian who is the star and raison d'être of ''Johnny English,'' has collected a devoted American following for his two television personas, the history-hopping scoundrel Blackadder and the hapless, spastic Mr. Bean. Blackadder, with his fluent stream of self-flattering nonsense, emphasizes Mr. Atkinson's skills as a verbal comedian; the silent Bean, in contrast, is a creature of pure slapstick, compounded out of twitches, grimaces, flailing limbs and unfortunate brushes with the laws of physics.
I should confess that I have never been a great fan of either one, but ''Johnny English,'' perhaps because it combines Mr. Atkinson's verbal dexterity with his physical clowning, won me over. At first glance, the movie's premise looks similar to that of the Austin Powers films. Johnny English, Mr. Atkinson's character, is a suave agent on Her Majesty's secret service -- or thinks he is, at any rate, and there is some obvious (though often quite funny) sending up of James Bond conventions. (Since the Bond movies have always included a healthy dose of self-mockery, this kind of thing feels a little redundant.)
But whereas the humor of Austin Powers consists of naughty sexual innuendos and ingenious (or at least self-congratulatory) pop-cultural references, ''Johnny English'' draws its laughter from simpler, less refined sources: sight gags, pratfalls and the occasional excursion into scatology. Johnny flops around after injecting himself with muscle relaxant; he catches his necktie in a conveyor belt at a sushi bar; he climbs up a sewer pipe just as a torrent of excrement begins to descend.
But don't be alarmed. As Johnny himself says, it's only a bit of poo. Most of the jokes are cleaner and more innocent, though members of the Church of England may object when the bare buttocks of the Archbishop of Canterbury are publicly exposed. I must add that this is only to prove that His Grace is not an impostor. (I would explain further, but it would spoil the joke.) No disrespect is intended; quite the contrary.
Johnny, true to his honorable surname, is committed to defending the great traditions of his island nation: his prancing and pantsing are aimed at protecting his country's glorious heritage of indomitability, constitutional monarchy and utter absurdity, a legacy that stretches back to the days of King Arthur, or at least to Monty Python and the Holy Grail.
Protecting it from whom, you might ask? Silly you! Why from the French, of course, here embodied by John Malkovich, who does live there, after all. Mr. Malkovich is Pascal Sauvage, a very rich man who heists the crown jewels as part of an elaborate plot to put himself on the British throne, to which he has an obscure ancestral claim. Sauvage's chief motive seems to be overpowering boredom, which is to Mr. Malkovich what sputtering rage is to Al Pacino. When English interrupts a conspiratorial dinner at Sauvage's chateau, Mr. Malkovich assumes the perfect posture and expression of ennui, and is, at that moment, as funny as Mr. Atkinson.
It is Mr. Atkinson, though, who rules the movie, with the assistance of a trusty sidekick (Ben Miller) and a raven-haired love interest (Natalie Imbruglia). He is like a sketch-comedy troupe rolled into one body, whose shape he seems able to alter at will, sometimes slinking like a demented weasel, sometimes lumbering like a quizzical ape. Not only that: the proportions of his face are similarly at his command, as if he could grow his nose and ears to fit the occasion.
The director, Peter Howitt, allows the occasions to unfold without being obtrusively stylish or interfering with Mr. Atkinson's nutty sense of timing. Unlike most movies of this kind, which run out of steam and ideas as they go along, ''Johnny English'' gains momentum, nudging you along from a few stray giggles to helpless, giddy laughter.
Inevitably, someone will raise the issue of geopolitical relevance. (Don't you hate that?) Here is a movie set in England and opening all over America on the Friday after Bastille Day, in which the villains are French. A stirring tribute to Anglophone solidarity in the face of Gallic treachery, or yet another arrogant slander against La Belle France?
Whichever argument you choose, bear in mind that ''Johnny English'' is distributed by Universal, which is (though probably not for long) the subsidiary of a French water company, and that it was partly financed by Studio Canal, also a French company. Clever of them, n'est-ce pas?
''Johnny English'' 
~
The action comedy ''Pirates of the Caribbean: Curse of the Black Pearl'' raises one of the most overlooked and important cinematic questions of our time: Can a movie maintain the dramatic integrity of a theme park ride?
In this case the answer is -- sure. The director Gore Verbinski's penchant for logistics -- combined with the producer Jerry Bruckheimer's desire to spend like a drunken pirate when it comes to putting everything on screen -- melts into an often frenetic, colorful and entertaining comic adventure that often seems to be using ''Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid'' as a template. The dazzling, high-flying silliness is quite an achievement. The movie is better than it deserves to be, given its origins: a ride at Disneyland and Disney World.
Mr. Verbinski's staging is as vertiginous as an amusement park ride and places the wiry and beauteous tomboy Keira Knightley at the center. Her physical assurance suggests what Nicole Kidman might be like if she didn't spend so much time coughing tragically into handkerchiefs in an equally tragic pursuit of important roles.
Ms. Knightley is Elizabeth Swann, owner of a medallion that gets the plot going a scant hour into ''Pirates.'' This trinket is first seen in a prologue sequence, in which little Elizabeth steals it from an equally young Will Turner. She has also stolen (sigh) his heart, as Will (Orlando Bloom) grows up to be a stalwart blacksmith -- and more than able swordsman -- who nurtures a secret crush on her. Ms. Knightley is strident and confident in her movement, an ability that makes her all the sexier and alluring, which is fortunate, given that her acting skills aren't quite as devastating as her looks.
The movie belongs to Johnny Depp as Capt. Jack Sparrow the pirate, a rapscallion who's as woozy as someone who has endured much too much time on a roller coaster. Mr. Depp doesn't get the opportunity to display his gift for comedy often, and his mellow, dizzied underplaying here is a balm, an antidote to the raucous battles and swashbuckling.
Gargling his consonants before spitting them out, Mr. Depp's pirate suggests a man who has spent either a great deal of time with Keith Richards after a tour of the Rebel Yell factory, or a man who has spent a great deal of time watching Mike Myers do his Keith Richards impression. Either way, festooned with dreadlocks and braids in his hair and beard, and wearing enough industrial-strength mascara to indicate that Captain Jack was probably influenced by another King of the Wild Frontier -- Adam Ant -- Mr. Depp offers a ratty, bedeviled turn that keeps the picture in motion during that extended period when there's not much plot involved.
But when this protracted state of narrative lassitude suddenly shifts, ''Pirates'' brings in enough story line for several movies. And in the words of Bart Simpson, it takes a knife-wielding maniac to show us the way: in this case it's the entrance of the pirate Barbossa (Geoffrey Rush, who's nearly as game -- and gamy -- as Mr. Depp).
He kidnaps Elizabeth because of the medallion. (There's a side benefit. ''She's the governor's daughter,'' one of Barbossa's hearties cackles.) The medallion turns out to be an enchanted piece of gold, which, with the blood of a special someone, can free Barbossa and his swabbies from their curse: they're the larcenous undead whose skeletons can be seen in the moonlight at night.
In addition Barbossa now commands the swift, capable ship the Black Pearl, which he seized from Jack Sparrow in a mutiny, after which he left Sparrow to die. Seeking revenge, Sparrow steals a ship and finds a new crew of his own, including Will, to pursue Barbossa.
There are plenty of salty, fatty moments in ''Pirates'' among the clearly staged fighting and rum-flavored comedy provided by Mr. Depp, Mr. Rush and the rest of the cast, including Jonathan Pryce as Elizabeth's craven, officious governor father. It's a hip slice of summer ham.
Mr. Verbinski swings his stylistic flourishes, which compel him to turn most interiors into haunted houses for their joke potential, and this notion gives the movie a deliriously antic air. Hilariously, every time the Black Pearl sails into view, an ominous cloud swirls around it, even in beautiful daylight. It's as if Barbossa carries his menacing mystique with him wherever he goes.
This is one of the few films that could justify use of a term that should never be used in describing a movie -- a thrill ride -- since it is, after all, based on one. Mr. Verbinski especially uses the scene in which Elizabeth discovers exactly what her captors want, in which she's thrown and shoved as if she were being slammed around on a roller coaster, to remind us of this.
There are also several other instances lifted right off the Pirates of the Caribbean ride. The thorough shamelessness of ''Pirates'' -- a trait it shares with many pictures this summer -- becomes part of the motif. And the good-natured professionalism of the cast -- with the exception of Mr. Bloom, who's stranded by the one-note intensity of his role -- adds to the cheerfulness. This broad, fluky comedy hits the groove of a remixed 12-inch single. Eventually it crams in so much plot information that there's an unwieldy surfeit of narrative treasure: it's bootylicious.
Perhaps this film's success will bring us a ''Batman, the Ride: The Movie'' or a ''Superman, the Ride: The Movie.'' After ''Pirates of the Caribbean: Curse of the Black Pearl,'' you will believe a man can synergize. But in these days of much concern about movies being stolen for sale in other forms -- bags were checked for video cameras before ''Pirates'' started -- another philosophical question comes to mind: If you don't like this film, does that make you anti-piracy?
''Pirates of the Caribbean'' 
~
When ''28 Days Later'' is not scaring you silly, it invites you to reflect seriously on the fragility of modern civilization, which has been swept away by a gruesome and highly contagious virus while the hero lies peacefully in a coma. Four weeks after a laboratory full of rage-infected monkeys has been liberated by some tragically misguided animal rights militants, the whole of London -- and possibly every place else -- has been substantially depopulated. The churches and alleyways are littered with corpses, and fast-moving, red-eyed ''infecteds'' roam the streets looking for prey. Even the rats flee from them, and the few healthy humans face a Hobbesian battle for survival.
But what is most striking, and most chilling, about the early scenes of this post-apocalyptic horror show, directed by Danny Boyle and written by Alex Garland, is the eerie, echoing emptiness. Stumbling out of his hospital bed, Jim (Cillian Murphy), a former bike messenger, encounters a familiar metropolis that has been almost entirely stripped of life. Postcard images of the Thames, London Bridge and the dome of St. Paul's Cathedral take on a lurid, funereal glow. After centuries of bustle and enterprise, what remain are vacant buildings, overturned double-decker buses, looted vending machines and cheap souvenir replicas of Big Ben scattered across the sidewalk.
In their previous collaboration, ''The Beach,'' Mr. Boyle and Mr. Garland tried to imagine how a small group of people, removed from the modern world, might reconstitute society from scratch, an experiment whose failure seemed preordained for both the characters and the filmmakers. Here, working with a more solid premise, a smaller budget and greater freedom (and without big movie stars), they probe a similar theme more persuasively.
Jim, it turns out, is not entirely alone. Before long, he and some other survivors -- a prickly loner named Selena (Naomie Harris); an affable dad, Frank (Brendan Gleeson); and Frank's adolescent daughter, Hannah (Megan Burns) -- have formed a tiny band of nomads, traveling the English countryside in a big, black taxi and discovering that caring for one another is not just a residue of extinct social norms, but also an expression of the survival instinct.
Other expressions, as you might expect, are not so inspiring. Through the silence comes a radio signal, a voice promising that salvation and the answer to the virus lie with a group of soldiers just north of Manchester. They are led by Maj. Henry West (Christopher Eccleston), who seems to have graduated from a ''Lord of the Flies'' military academy. He and his men are on hand to demonstrate that those who offer protection and security can be even more dangerous than the virus-crazed zombies they keep at bay.
The soldiers also allow Mr. Garland and Mr. Boyle an exit from nightmarish claustrophobia into a more conventional (though still quite effective) action-and-suspense story. As such, and as a parable of human nature under extreme duress, ''28 Days Later'' is never less than interesting and acknowledges fairly directly its debt to the visionary ghoulishness of George Romero, who made ''Night of the Living Dead,'' ''Dawn of the Dead'' and ''Day of the Dead.'' The suggestive juxtaposition of zombification and consumerism in ''Dawn,'' which took place mostly in an abandoned shopping mall, is evoked in several scenes here, as are the queasy racial politics of ''Night.''
But the most haunting moments in ''28 Days Later,'' which opens today nationwide, have little to do with social allegory, graphic horror or cinematic shock tactics. The movie, shot in digital video by Anthony Dod Mantle (who has worked with Dogma 95 disciples like Harmony Korine, Thomas Vinterberg and Lars von Trier), sometimes has an ethereal, almost painterly beauty. The London skyline takes on the faded, melancholy quality of a Turner watercolor; a field of flowers looks as if it were daubed and scraped directly onto the screen. Thanks to Mr. Mantle's images and Mr. Boyle's unexpected restraint, the middle section of the picture, though punctuated by mayhem and grimness, has a pastoral mood, and the actors, unwinding from the stress and panic of London, are allowed to be warm, loose and funny.
Mr. Boyle, whose other films include ''Shallow Grave'' and ''Trainspotting,'' has never been accused of lacking narrative flair or visual style. Rather, he has sometimes been suspected of having too much of both, and of lacking gravity or soul. Those movies, though exciting, could leave a sour aftertaste of cynicism in your mouth. The content of this one is far more extreme; you can almost smell the rotting flesh. But what lingers is a curious sweetness. Mr. Boyle has hardly lost his sly, provocative perversity or his ear for the rhythms of unchecked violence, but he does seem to be maturing. It's as if, in contemplating the annihilation of the human race, he has discovered his inner humanist.
''28 Days Later'' 
~
The stoic mysticism of Niki Caro's cool-handed charmer ''Whale Rider'' -- in which the young Pai must overcome resistance as she tries to assume her destiny as the leader of a tribe on the New Zealand coast -- is wickedly absorbing. Much of the film's power comes from the delicate charisma of Keisha Castle-Hughes, making her acting debut as Pai.
Ms. Castle-Hughes lacks the traditional resources of an actress, and instead communicates her feelings through a wary hesitation. It doesn't matter that her voice makes her sound a little lost, still trying to find her way into a world that disdains her. Her intelligent, dark eyes are so expressive that she has the piquant confidence of a silent-film heroine.
Her instinctive underplaying gives ''Whale Rider'' an added gravity, with the lush remoteness of the landscape serving as an entrancing contrast to the sugar-rush, you-go-girl empowerment of programmed pandering like ''The Lizzie McGuire Movie,'' whose tweener heroine flails her arms and bats her eyes as if she were sending distress signals. The director demonstrates a class and tact that brand ''Whale Rider,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, as more than a time-filler for young moviegoers or an ironman competition for adults accompanying them.
Pai's natural rectitude -- the way she plays both pride and hurt -- is even used by Ms. Caro as a hereditary trait. Pai's prickly grandfather Koro (Rawiri Paratene) displays a contempt for her that is like a deadpan force of nature itself. Koro, the tribal chief, wanted a grandson to take on his mantle. But Pai's twin brother died in a difficult birth, which also took her mother's life, and her father, Porourangi (Cliff Curtis), has deserted the family for a career as an artist. Koro treats his granddaughter as the living embodiment of a curse. When he bothers to pay attention to her at all, it's through a sharp cutting of his eyes in her direction.
Tradition dictates that the first-born grandson step into the role of chief, but Pai -- named Paikea by her father, after the tribe's ancient ancestor, who legend says arrived in the village on the back of a whale -- is all the family has.
Her patient grandmother Nanny Flowers (Vicky Haughton) encourages Pai to give things time; Nanny Flowers also refuses to crumple under the galling chauvinism of her husband. But Pai has endured the suffering for all of her 12 years. And though she has a plucky physical assurance -- the firm hand of her grandmother has helped keep her demeanor strong -- she still wants the nurturing she feels is her due.
Ms. Caro treats the material with the calm of a silent film and exploits the extravagant beauty of the location for its majesty. Each shot of the vistas in the breathtakingly lovely village is presented with an even clarity; Ms. Caro and her cinematographer, Leon Narbey, let the audience be seduced by the daunting power, rather than overwhelming viewers with it.
With a deft hand, the director bridges the disconnect between the modern touches in the village -- like the hilarious, cranky chatter over card games -- and the determination to cling to traditions. It is evident that tradition is the way the Whangara tribe maintains its spirituality, which defines it.
The critical moment comes in a set piece that has the potential to send the film off into florid, find-your-bliss sentimentality: a whale cruises too close to the shoreline and needs to be steered back into deeper, life-sustaining waters. Ms. Caro refuses to oversaturate the film with anxious hyperdramatics. It is a moment in which she must show that she trusts her young star, a faith that pays off with a disarmingly touching climax.
But you will have surrendered to ''Whale Rider'' long before then. The film shows strength by tightening the rhythms of the scenes; be warned that the longueurs that surface in the first 10 minutes or so may make demands on your patience. Ms. Caro and her editor, David Coulson, obviously wanted to dissipate any feeling of forced pathos that might accompany the intense tragedy experienced by Pai's family. It's a welcome exercise of taste on the director's part.
Mr. Curtis's total immersion in the role of Pai's father rescues him from the typecasting of his previous work -- playing dark-skinned bad guys of indeterminate ethnicity. His excitement alone adds a charge to the picture.
Ms. Caro's attempt to fight the mawkishness inherent in the film's opening by setting a tone of emotional tidiness makes the rest of ''Whale Rider'' distinctively efficient; this gamble makes the first section seem distended and a little drab. Still, there aren't many filmmakers who would have fought that initial heightening of heartbreak. Too flamboyant an opening would have left the movie with no place to go and embarrassed us with so early a claim on our sentiments. Bear with ''Whale Rider'': once the picture kicks into gear, it has the inspiring resonance of found art.
''Whale Rider'' 
~
Among the finned creatures who wriggle and dart through Disney/Pixar's sparkling aquatic fable, ''Finding Nemo,'' the most comically inspired is a great white shark named Bruce (the voice of Barry Humphries), who glides through the ocean flanked by two menacing sidekicks, Anchor (Eric Bana), a hammerhead, and Chum (Bruce Spence), a mako. An ominous hulk, with eyes like gleaming bullets and a savage jack-o'-lantern grin, Bruce has adopted a 12-step program to curb his insatiable appetite for other fish. ''Fish are friends, not food,'' goes the mantra he repeats in an unctuously imperious drawl whenever he's tempted to gobble up a passing morsel.
But sharks will be sharks, and Bruce's resolution is awfully shaky. In the movie's scariest scene, the drifting scent of blood drives him into a ravenous frenzy in which his eyes turn black and he lunges after Marlin (Albert Brooks), the meek little orange-and-white clown fish he has been regaling with his recovery spiel. Their hair-raising life-or-death chase takes them around a sunken submarine and through a minefield.
Bruce is only the most fearsome of the predators encountered by Marlin, a nervous, overprotective father who sets out over the great, wide ocean to find his lost son Nemo (Alexander Gould). Before his journey is over, he finds himself trapped in the mouth of a blue whale with only moments to spare before it takes a big, lethal gulp, and pursued by a flock of sea gulls that are almost as menacing as the birds in Alfred Hitchcock's avian nightmare.
Nemo, a squeaky-voiced youngster who was born with one fin smaller than the other, disappears on his first day of school after defying his father with a daredevil stunt. Leaving the security of the Great Barrier Reef where he and his dad live comfortably inside a sea anemone, he swims out to inspect a distant boat and is scooped up in a scuba diver's net.
Although Marlin swims to the rescue, he is repelled by the blast of the boat's propeller. The boy eventually lands inside the aquarium of a dentist in Sydney, Australia, where his tank companions are so bored they have picked up the technical argot of dentistry from observing their keeper. In setting out to find Nemo, Marlin has only a single clue as to his whereabouts: the address of the fishing boat.
In its broadest outlines, ''Finding Nemo,'' which opens nationwide today, is an upbeat, sentimental fable about a fearful father and a rebellious son who recklessly breaks away. Each has to learn to trust and respect the other, but to arrive at a better understanding both must endure any number of harrowing trials.
At home, Marlin, a well-meaning worrywart, addresses his son in the nagging whine of a nervous milquetoast. Initially he seems the least likely candidate to risk his life to save anyone. But once he takes to the open water, he is unstoppably courageous and resourceful in his quest to find the boy.
Along the way he teams up with Dory (Ellen DeGeneres), an inveterately cheery blue tang with a severe case of short-term memory loss that causes many complications. The character, who speaks in daffy non sequiturs but knows enough to tutor Marlin in the funny language of whales, is the movie's comic center. And Ms. DeGeneres infuses what could have been a one-note role with an irresistible enthusiasm and playfulness.
The adventures they share include near-entrapment in a school of deadly jellyfish and a joy ride on the East Australian Current with a green sea turtle named Crush (Andrew Stanton) who, despite being 150 years old, has the adventurous spirit and vocabulary of a 16-year-old surfer dude.
High on the movie's list of accomplishments is its creation of an undersea wonderland whose opalescent colors and shifting light reflect the enchanted aura of dreamy aquatic photography. Whether the setting is a fish tank or an ocean current, the movie successfully sustains a watery ambience, not an easy thing to do given water's semitransparency.
''Finding Nemo'' doesn't pretend that its undersea environment is a happier alterative to the world above. Under its comforting narrative arc, it presents a stark vision of the sea world as a treacherous jungle that, for all its beauty and excitement, is an extremely dangerous place to live. The movie jumps right into the darker side of life in a scene in which Marlin and his wife, Coral (Elizabeth Perkins), marvel at the more than 400 eggs that are about to yield a brood of children, only to have their future snatched away with the unwelcome appearance of a barracuda. In one furious snap, the intruder devours Coral and all but one of the eggs, leaving only Marlin and the single egg that becomes Nemo.
Once Nemo has landed in the aquarium, the story cuts back and forth between the father, desperately searching for his son, and Nemo making friends with his tankmates and plotting an improbable escape. The tank's unofficial leader, Gill (Willem Dafoe), is a black-and-white-striped Moorish idol, who like Nemo is a former ocean dweller longing to return to the sea.
The escape plan becomes a race against time once Nemo learns he is to be given as a present to the dentist's 8-year-old niece, Darla, a savage little monster who has been known to take a baggie containing a fish and shake it violently. Darla's appearances are accompanied by snippets of the shrieking murder music from ''Psycho.''
Visual imagination and sophisticated wit raise ''Finding Nemo'' to a level just below the peaks of Pixar's ''Toy Story'' movies and ''Monsters, Inc.,'' which were created by many of the same hands. (Mr. Stanton, who plays Crush and was co-director of ''A Bug's Life,'' directs ''Nemo'' with Lee Unkrich.) As in the earlier Pixar movies, the animation achieves an astonishing synergy of voice, computer-animated image and dialogue. Facial expressions match vocal inflections with a precision that lends even the minor characters an almost surreal clarity.
The humor bubbling through ''Finding Nemo'' is so fresh, sure of itself and devoid of the cutesy, saccharine condescension that drips through so many family comedies that you have to wonder what it is about the Pixar technology that inspires the creators to be so endlessly inventive. The capacity of computer-animation to evoke a three-dimensional sense of detail obviously has something to do with it. But the enterprise still wouldn't amount to much without the formidable storytelling talents driving it.
FINDING NEMO
Directed by Andrew Stanton; co-directed by Lee Unkrich; written by Mr. Stanton, Bob Peterson and David Reynolds, based on a story by Mr. Stanton; directors of photography, Sharon Calahan and Jeremy Lasky; edited by David Ian Salter; music by Thomas Newman; production designer, Ralph Eggleston; produced by Graham Walters; released by Walt Disney Pictures and Pixar Animation Studios. Running time: 104 minutes. This film 
~
Fiction and reality are so seamlessly blended in ''It Runs in the Family,'' a surprisingly complex and subtle portrait of the Grombergs, a high-powered clan of New York lawyers, that the temptation to assume its characters are modeled after the actors playing them is almost irresistible. Four of those actors -- Kirk, Michael, Cameron and Diana Douglas -- are related by birth or by marriage and play fictionalized versions of themselves in the film.
Throughout the movie you can feel the actors' offscreen relationships resonating with their performances and enriching them immeasurably. One strand of a story that deftly skips among half a dozen major characters is the strained but loving relationship of the Grombergs' cantankerous patriarch, Mitchell (Kirk Douglas), and Alex (Michael Douglas), his son, who works in the New York law firm his father founded. The two stars have made no secret that their relationship has weathered its share of strife. In the case of the Grombergs, Alex continually grumbles that his hard-bitten father, a feisty, scowling World War II veteran recovering from a stroke (despite a speech impediment, he has ''a few good years left,'' Mitchell's doctor assures him), has never demonstrated his approval or declared his love.
The movie, which opens nationwide today, is wonderful at showing how trivial incidents can unlock reserves of festering resentment in a high-strung household whose male members are infused with the same hyper-competitive success ethic that echoes what we know about the Kennedys. Michael's son Cameron makes a splashy acting debut as 21-year-old Asher, the older of Alex's two sons. An arrogant, girl-crazy part-time D.J. with a macho hip-hop attitude, Asher, who is failing in school, deals homegrown marijuana. And his 11-year-old brother, Eli (Rory Culkin), a brash martial-arts whiz, appears to be on the same reckless path.
The scenes of three generations of Bromberg males bumping elbows depict a lineage in which the testosterone runs rampant. Mitchell, who is somewhere in his 80's, is still a dogged fighter who takes (slow) daily jogs around the Central Park Reservoir. Alex, although happily married to Rebecca (Bernadette Peters), a psychotherapist, is helpless to resist when Suzie (Sarita Choudhury), a young assistant in the soup kitchen where he volunteers, furiously flings herself at him and refuses to take no for an answer. (This scene amusingly parodies the star's moments of sex-under-siege in ''Fatal Attraction'' and ''Disclosure.'')
Lastly, there is Diana Douglas (Michael's real-life mother and former wife of Kirk) as Evelyn, Alex's mother and Mitchell's devoted spouse, a super-competent matriarch and caretaker. Like her son, Evelyn has suffered from Mitchell's benign emotional neglect (although her husband is completely dependent on her).
Because ''It Runs in the Family'' is so steeped in Hollywood tradition, you keep expecting the usual feel-good formulas of serious domestic comedy to kick in and hijack the movie by turning it into an innocuous sugarcoated placebo. But, wonder of wonders, it doesn't happen. Before the film is over, two of the major characters have died and been mourned. And although the Grombergs' interlocking personal dramas ultimately bring them somewhat closer, the screenplay offers no pat resolutions to any of their problems. The movie gazes as steadily at the decrepitude of old age as it does at the chutzpah of youthful entitlement. Nor does it shy away from the Grombergs' Jewishness, which is central to their identity.
Alex's wandering eye gets him exiled from the bedroom, while his social conscience seriously collides with the financial interests of his law firm. Mitchell, browbeaten by his wife and son to be more expressive, rails against old age. Asher's drug dealing catches up with him just as he is about to embark on his first serious relationship. Eli develops a crush on a runaway girl with a pierced nose.
Although these and other subplots create a much more complex narrative framework than most filmmakers would dream of constructing, Jesse Wigutow's screenplay is one of those marvels of economy, idiomatic facility and well-chosen detail that knows exactly when to cut away from a scene without grinding it into your face. And Fred Schepisi's direction finds a comfortable balance between comedy and clear-eyed realism. Over and over, the movie flirts with sentimentality, then dances away from it. Its only serious lapses into mush are the scenes of Evelyn coaxing Mitchell into dancing to Bobby Darin's recording of ''You'll Never Know,'' which turns into the movie's maudlin and redundant theme song.
Besides its laudable reluctance to tie up loose ends, the most courageous thing about ''It Runs in the Family'' is its refusal to try to make you love its aggressive, strong-willed characters. Alex may be a good guy (he volunteers at a soup kitchen and does pro bono work for worthy causes), but like his father, he is a bully. So is the obnoxious but charismatic Asher. Although the movie may not be aware of its message, it portrays the cost of certain kinds of professional success as an inability to let go, relax and smell the roses. It's that inability that keeps the Grombergs, despite their talents and their social conscience, from being particularly likable people.
''It Runs in the Family'' 
~
Louis Sachar's 1998 novel ''Holes,'' which among other prizes has won a Newbery Medal and a National Book Award, has also, and more important, attracted a fanatical following among children in the middle grades. Since these tend to be the most passionate and also the pickiest members of the reading public, their fierce regard for Mr. Sachar's book should not be taken lightly.
Any adult who has read ''Holes'' -- and I suspect there are quite a few, not all of them the parents or teachers of sixth graders -- will immediately see the sources of its appeal. There is a clear moral scheme balanced by morally complex characters, irreverent humor combined with earnest emotion and, most of all, enough plot to satisfy the addiction to narrative that affects so many of our youth today.
The central story -- of a boy named Stanley Yelnats, unjustly sent to a camp for delinquents for stealing a pair of baseball cleats -- sprouts wild tendrils of invention that reach from the Old Country (in this case, Latvia) to the Old West. Their elegant, suspenseful resolution makes this novel a masterpiece of juvenile magic realism.
As abundant as its pleasures are, ''Holes'' is equally notable for what it lacks: the icky sentiment and cynical condescension that mark too many efforts to turn the intelligence and curiosity of young people into a source of profit. Since Hollywood often specializes in sentimentality and cynicism (to say nothing of profit), the movie of ''Holes,'' which opens nationwide today, might be met with apprehension by some of the book's fans. Not to worry. Mr. Sachar, who wrote the screenplay, has betrayed neither his own imagination nor that of his audience. The director, Andrew Davis (''The Fugitive''), has turned the book's spare, gritty allegory into a shaggy-dog saga that is sometimes hectic but always surprising and never easy, predictable or false.
Young Stanley (Shia LaBeouf), is plucked from his family's chaotic apartment, where his father (Henry Winkler) is trying to invent an antidote for foot odor, and sent off to Camp Green Lake. Under the sinister eye of Mr. Sir (Jon Voight) and the two-faced tutelage of a staff member, Dr. Pendanski (Tim Blake Nelson), whom the boys sarcastically call Mom, the young inmates are assigned the task of digging holes, one after another, in the desert. The stated goal of this backbreaking Sisyphean labor is to build character, but it also seems that the warden (Sigourney Weaver) is using the boys to find some mysterious, precious treasure that she believes is buried in the sand.
The tough, prickly camaraderie among the boys and their solidarity in the face of adult cruelty give the picture its heart and also its pedigree, which includes movies like ''Stalag 17,'' ''The Great Escape,'' ''Cool Hand Luke'' and, more recently, ''Chicken Run.'' The weaselly Mr. Nelson, the growly, strutting Mr. Voight and the chilly, feline Ms. Weaver form a fine menagerie of grown-up corruption.
The younger actors are appropriately boisterous and appealing. Mr. LaBeouf, with his soft face and curly hair, rises to the challenge of depicting a coddled, sensitive young man who must prove his toughness without sacrificing his decency. Both qualities are tested by the other boys and also by Stanley's growing friendship with an especially troubled camp mate, a feral, runty child with the nickname Zero.
To offset the dusty bleakness of Camp Green Lake, a place beset by rattlesnakes and poisonous lizards, ''Holes'' conjures up storybook landscapes and subplots, which at first glance seem weirdly digressive. There is the matter of the Yelnats family curse, which has dogged four generations of Stanleys after being applied, back in Latvia, by Madame Zeroni (Eartha Kitt).
Then there is the legend of Kate Barlow (Patricia Arquette), a 19th-century kissing bandit who harassed travelers near the present-day site of the camp. The connections between past and present emerge slowly; as the campers dig their literal holes, the movie quietly fills in the narrative holes and along the way uncovers some hard, substantial themes like greed, fate and the legacy of racism.
And it deals with these themes more honestly and with more respect for the audience's intelligence than most movies aimed at supposed grown-ups. The interracial romance that is, along with the Yelnats curse, the kernel of all that follows is treated with neither the skittishness nor the sensationalism that still characterize so many studio pictures. Perhaps the current generation of 10-year-olds has outgrown the hypocrisy and squeamishness of its forebears.
In any case, Mr. Sachar's young devotees will be gratified that ''Holes'' shows such fidelity to its source. But unlike, say, the ''Harry Potter'' films, Mr. Davis's movie has a brash, confident identity of its own. You spend much of it in a state of flashlight-under-the-covers breathlessness, wondering what on earth will happen next and what Stanley's unhappy predicament has to do with an ancient curse or the sad fate of a late-19th-century Texas onion peddler (Dulé Hill).
''Holes'' is one of the few recent movies I have seen that plunged me into that rare, giddy state of pleasurable confusion, of not knowing what would happen next, which I associate with the reading and moviegoing experiences of my own childhood. But there is no reason that children should have a monopoly on this primal, wonderful experience.
Yes, ''Holes'' is certainly the thing that schoolchildren will drag their parents to see on spring-break afternoons, but the parents who are dragged will find themselves watching the best film released by a major American studio so far this year.
''Holes'' 
~
After seeing Mitch and Mickey, the legendary folk-music duo of the 1960's, reunite on the stage of Town Hall to perform their signature tune, ''A Kiss at the End of the Rainbow,'' I wanted nothing so much as to go out to the garage and dig out some of their old LP's, just for old times' sake. The only problem -- apart from my not having a garage -- is that these dewy-eyed singers, their songs so twee and noodle-headed as to make Richard and Mimi Fariña sound like the Ramones, never existed.
''A Mighty Wind,'' Christopher Guest's latest trompe l'oeil satire (following ''Waiting for Guffman'' and ''Best in Show'') almost makes you believe that Mitch and Mickey were real, which is an impressive stunt. More than that, it makes you almost wish that they were, which is something of a miracle.
Mr. Guest, his writing collaborator Eugene Levy (who also plays Mitch), and their goofy deadpan ensemble have decided to resuscitate the commercial folk music that survives nowadays mostly at summer camp singalongs and on public television, and they have done so with sweet-natured, loony affection.
Like the small-town troupers in ''Guffman'' and the dog-show competitors in ''Best in Show,'' the pickers and chirpers of ''A Mighty Wind'' are immune to embarrassment and utterly devoted to their own peculiar notions of artistic accomplishment and show-business glory. They are, it must be said, pretty good at making bad music. The soundtrack, full of swaybacked metaphors, rousing choruses and mind-numbing harmonies, may yet make stars of Mitch and Mickey and their fake-folk comrades, the Folksmen and the New Main Street Singers. Sincerity is the hallmark of this kind of music, and the parody of it that Mr. Guest and his company offer here is often indistinguishable from the real thing.
''Guffman'' and ''Best in Show'' were devoted to subcultures from which the audience could feel a certain detachment, even (whether or not this was Mr. Guest's intention) to the point of superiority. ''A Mighty Wind'' addresses a broader swath of American popular culture, making it more accessible, harder to escape and also vulnerable to the charge that it has missed its satiric target.
The folk music scene of the 1960's, as David Hajdu argued in the Arts & Leisure section of The New York Times last Sunday, was more eclectic and more deeply engaged in politics than the version presented in this film, and it is certainly strange to see a movie about folk music that makes no allusion to the civil-rights movement or the Vietnam War. (The only reference to the left-wing folk heritage comes in the form of a Spanish Civil War ballad much beloved by one of the Folksmen and tolerated by his colleagues.)
But to grumble too much about the filmmakers' selective fidelity to the world that exists is to risk underestimating their fidelity to the world they invent. ''A Mighty Wind,'' that is, is only superficially a satire in the fish-in-a-barrel, sketch comedy sense. Its spirit is not so much caustic as utopian, though it conjures a utopia, like the one evoked in the title song, of blithe cluelessness, earnest self-delusion and joyful nonsense.
The film's pseudo-documentary narrative is built around a memorial concert for Irving Steinbloom, a legendary impresario. The event is organized by Steinbloom's son Jonathan (Bob Balaban), a compulsive, unsmiling fellow whose adult personality may owe something to the childhood experience of being forced by his over-protective mother to wear a helmet while playing chess.
Jonathan enlists his father's favorite acts, including the Folksmen (Harry Shearer, Michael McKean, and Mr. Guest) and the New Main Street Singers, a ''neuftet'' that blurs the boundary between singing group and cult. (Their leaders, played by John Michael Higgins and Jane Lynch, practice a spiritual discipline based on the vibratory power of color.) But the real coup is reuniting Mitch and Mickey (Catherine O'Hara), onetime lovebirds who endured a bad breakup and who have moved on to other things, he to a mental hospital and she to a second marriage to a model-train enthusiast who works in ''the bladder control industry.''
The matter-of-fact absurdity of this last phrase is a hallmark of Mr. Guest and Mr. Levy's improvisatory comic style. Their jokes are sometimes so subtle as to seem imperceptible, until you realize that they are everywhere, from the broadest gestures to the tiniest details of dress and décor.
The cast of ''A Mighty Wind,'' which opens nationwide today, would fill a concert hall, and it is impossible to think of a group of people capable of being funny in so many different ways, from the over-the-top buffoonery of Fred Willard (as a sitcom-star turned road manager) to the mugging of Jennifer Coolidge (paired with Larry Miller as a publicist couple that, as she puts it ''share a single brain'') to the toothy, near-demented perkiness of Parker Posey (as a second-generation New Main Street Singer).
Of all of them, Mr. Levy and Ms. O'Hara are the two who have, historically, been the funniest. If I had a dollar for every kernel of popcorn they have made me aspirate, separately and together, since their SCTV days in the 1970's, I'd be rich. This time, though, Mr. Levy, while sufficiently ridiculous with his vacant stare, hesitant diction and swept-back gray hair, is also a lovable, vulnerable lost soul. And Ms. O'Hara has the sublime wit to play Mickey completely straight.
There is something almost shockingly poignant about the way they portray former lovers who have drifted far from stardom, and from each other, and who are drawn back together by the power of music. The music may be perfectly awful -- actually it is both perfect and awful -- but its power, this movie suggests, is nothing to laugh at. Or so you might realize, if you could only stop laughing long enough to form the thought.
''A Mighty Wind 
~
At Camp Ovation, a summer musical theater workshop for young people in upstate New York, the reigning pop deity isn't Eminem but Stephen Sondheim. Aboard the yellow school bus carrying the 6- to 16-year-old students from New York City to this miniature Oz, the fresh-faced passengers spontaneously burst into that jolly old singalong ''Losing My Mind,'' from ''Follies.''
The sight of these perky, self-described freaks cheerily chirping a tortured love ballad as if it were ''99 Bottles of Beer on the Wall'' is the first of many drop-dead funny jokes that regularly punctuate ''Camp.'' A crude but irresistibly effervescent movie cut from the same sequined cloth as ''Fame,'' ''Camp'' couldn't be better timed to ride the coattails of ''Chicago'' to cult popularity.
Could a place like Camp Ovation really exist? Yes, believe it or not. Located at Loch Sheldrake, N.Y., it's called the Stagedoor Manor, where ''Camp'' was filmed in just 23 days. The film's writer and director, Todd Graff, is a Stage Door alumnus and former teacher, and ''Camp'' explodes with his passion for his subject. A cast of unknowns, who are every bit as talented as the finalists on ''American Idol,'' sock home show tunes ranging from ''And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going'' (from ''Dreamgirls'') to the movie's hilarious ensemble showstopper, ''Turkey Lurkey Time'' (the madcap Christmas party anthem from ''Promises, Promises'').
''Camp'' is the offspring of ''Fame'' in more ways than one. Woven among the vintage show tunes are originals by several writers, including two ballads by the composer of ''Fame,'' Michael Gore, with lyrics by Lynn Ahrens, that exhibit the same heart-on-sleeve sentimentality as that movie's ''Out Here on My Own.'' ''Camp,'' which the New Directors/New Films series is screening tonight and on Sunday (it opens commercially in July), is peopled with the same endearingly starry-eyed caricatures as ''Fame,'' but there's a difference. These teenagers -- black, white, Latino, gay and straight -- display a hip, easygoing candor, especially when it comes to sexual orientation, that's pretty much unprecedented for a teenager-slanted movie musical.
With the exception of the milky-skinned, guitar-strumming Vlad (David Letterle), who delivers a mild-mannered rendition of the Rolling Stones' ''Wild Horses,'' the boys at Camp Ovation appear to be gay. One major subplot follows the tortured friendship of Vlad and his roommate Michael (Robin De Jesus), a pimply, abject drag queen rejected by his family, who practically swoons at Vlad's feet. One of the funniest moments is a surprise birthday party for Michael in which all the students deck themselves out as drag queens and kings.
Another running psychodrama, which suggests a teenage variation on ''All About Eve,'' involves Jill (Alana Allen), a snooty blond sexpot who makes a beeline for Vlad, and her worshipful acolyte, Fritzi (Anne Kendrick). When Jill summarily dismisses Fritzi as both servant and friend, the exiled doormat takes delicious, Eve-Harrington-worthy revenge on her former idol, upstaging her with a sultry, knockout rendition of ''Ladies Who Lunch.''
Meanwhile, Vlad hooks up with the insecure Ellen (Joanna Chilcoat), who blossoms under his flattering attentions. Other smaller dramas involve the chubby Jenna (Tiffany Taylor), whose father has wired her jaw shut to keep her from overeating but who still sings up a storm, and Dee (Sasha Allen), a pop-gospel belter whose terror of becoming a lifelong gay-camp follower drives her to sleep around.
The last major subplot focuses on the personal renaissance of Bert Hanley (Don Dixon), a bitter alcoholic teacher and Broadway composer who hasn't had a hit show since 1989. It is Bert who delivers a harsh dose of reality therapy to the students in a tirade that laments the thinning out of musical comedy talent after the deaths of Michael Bennett and Bob Fosse and the metamorphosis of 42nd Street into a theme park. In his worst nightmare, he sneeringly imagines the students turning into members of that eccentric breed of musical comedy aficionados who live to collect out-of-print albums of obscure shows.
But for all the doses of reality that ''Camp'' dishes out, the movie, deep in its soul, is a delirious musical comedy romp that proudly adheres to silly but time-honored Broadway traditions. When Vlad comes upon a cache of undiscovered original songs by Bert, he organizes an end-of-the-season revue that lifts the teacher out of his self-pitying funk. True to formula, that revue is imperiled by the kind of last-minute crises that Mickey and Judy gamely surmounted, but of course, the show must go on.
''Camp'' may be rickety, formulaic, overacted and tonally wobbly, but its spark of enthusiasm is so infectious that you have to love it for its faults. Just like the musical comedy revivals these students slap together with such maniacal zeal, the movie feels held together by not much more than spit and shoe polish. But in ''Camp,'' those things are just another word for love.
CAMP
Written and directed by Todd Graff; director of photography, Kip Bogdahn; edited by Myron Kerstein; music by Stephen Trask; production designer, Dina Goldman; produced by Katie Roumel, Christine Vachon, Pamela Koffler, Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher and Jonathan Weisgal; released by IFC Films. Running time: 115 minutes. This film is not rated. Tonight at 9 at Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center, and Sunday at 3 p.m. at MoMA Film at the Gramercy Theater, 127 East 23rd Street, Manhattan, as part of the 32nd New Directors/New Films series of the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the department of film and media of the Museum of Modern Art.
WITH: Daniel Letterle (Vlad), Joanna Chilcoat (Ellen), Robin De Jesus (Michael), Steven Cutts (Shaun), Vince Rimoldi (Spitzer), Kahiry Bess (Petie), Tiffany Taylor (Jenna), Sasha Allen (Dee), Alana Allen (Jill), Anne Kendrick (Fritzi) and Don Dixon (Bert).

~
Neil Jordan's ''Good Thief'' is nominally a remake of Jean-Pierre Melville's 1955 atmospheric and poetic film noir, ''Bob le Flambeur.'' But Mr. Jordan, as writer and director, has soaked his remake in color and pushed the combustion by a few cylinders. The movie feels more like a breezy, jazz-inflected version of the original: it's a triumph of flourish, all weathered, movie-star-size gestures. Melville's original was engulfed by reticence and oppression; his gambling Bob was a pained ghost floating through the story.
The film was a European black-and-white version of a genre picture, with Roger Duchesne dressed up as the doomy Pepe le Moko protagonist. ''Bob le Flambeur'' may be the most diaphanous piece of movie cool ever completed; in storytelling terms, it barely exists, a quality that makes it ripe for a remake.
Mr. Jordan gives ''The Good Thief'' a 50's jazz elegance that would have suited ''Bob le Flambeur'' and adds the glorious visual scheme of the French pop art that was inspired by that period's music, like Coltrane's ''Blue Trane.'' By setting the picture on the impossibly gorgeous Riviera and using shades of blue as visual metaphors, Mr. Jordan, working with the cinematographer Chris Menges, makes the film's look exemplary: it combines American flamboyance and French existentialist delirium.
As played by Nick Nolte, Bob is a brawny noir pinup as trickster, an old dog who never lets on how many tricks he knows. Mr. Nolte uses a saturnine contentment -- a form of gamesmanship that keeps manly archetypes a step ahead of everyone else -- to create a real character instead of a series of attitudes. Bob lives in a kind of purgatory of his own making. This is a Jordan motif that he has populated here with characters who don't pine for heaven; they yearn only for a little smoking room instead.
Bob is a seedy, charismatic gambler and heroin addict who wears dark clothes not only for their romantic silhouette but probably also because they hide the bloodstains from his tracks. A towering figure in the Nice demimonde, he is followed by the beautiful teenage Russian émigré Anne (Nutsa Kukhianidze), a waitress in the gloriously rundown boîte where Bob luxuriates in his supremely accomplished seediness.
Bob is pulled into a casino heist and has to stay a heartbeat ahead of the art-swindler thugs who pressure him into committing the crime, as well as ahead of his detective friend, Roger (Tcheky Karyo). No small feat, since Bob is so chilled out that he barely seems to have a heartbeat; even kicking heroin cold turkey seems to be a tour of downbeat glamour for him.
Mr. Jordan has the right actor for the task. Mr. Nolte uses ''The Good Thief'' as a haven for a majestic ruin he has worked at for years. It's quite an accomplishment. There aren't many American actors who have made a penchant for self-destructive behavior blossom into a fully realized gallery of performances. He has played other versions of this Zen/Beat warrior: Neal Cassady in the Beat movement chronicle ''Heartbeat'' and a de facto version of Cassady in ''Who'll Stop the Rain?'' What makes Bob such a lark for Mr. Nolte is his loving appreciation for shambles, both his own and the chaos that he can engineer. He is a fallen god with a marrow-deep understanding of his tumble from grace.
This marriage of weariness and boldness is unusual for Mr. Jordan; he, too, is attracted to characters pitched into a downward spiral, but no one is hunched into a tight-lipped compact with Mephisto here. He adds a layer of inside jokes (the directors Emir Kusturica and Mark and Mike Polish appear in small roles). Bob's sense of irony puts him beyond torment; the friends in his circle, like Paulo (Said Taghmaoui), the loyal student of his lifestyle, are lifted by his invincibility.
The movie is the ultimate caper, a work of brazen ebullience that does something unusual for Mr. Jordan: this is the first of his films that could be scored with a saxophone instead of a cello. And, as in Melville's original, there's no there there.
''The Good Thief'' 
~
The 16-year-old Victor (Victor Rasuk) of ''Raising Victor Vargas'' is all teenage assertion, but his machismo has training wheels. He may be a smart boy, but at this point in his life he's too busy trying to be a wiseguy; he hasn't engaged his brains just yet. In the director Peter Sollett's delicate and altogether satisfying romantic comedy -- which plays today at Alice Tully Hall and tomorrow at the Walter Reade Theater, the opener of this year's New Films/New Directors series -- it is Victor's puffed-rice pride that always gets him into trouble.
This is a tricky subject to make a film about and part of what will leave you taking in all the delights of ''Vargas'' with open-mouthed wonder comes from the director's surefooted navigating of the way pride bounces around a small, packed household, the tiny apartment Victor lives in.
He gets a good dose of his pride from his grandmother (Altagracia Guzman). This small, stubborn salt-of-the-earth woman is raising Victor, along with his younger brother Nino (Silvestre Rasuk) and little sister Vicky (Krystal Rodriguez). In the larger world, all this stuff might not add up to a hill of beans, but Mr. Sollett treats the emotional shifts in the Vargas household like the movement of tectonic plates: each change rocks the characters' lives.
Like many 16-year-old boys, Victor wants to be a player, chasing down girls in his Lower East Side neighborhood. This callous, self-involved puppy of a ladies' man leaves a trail of scattered, hilarious affairs in his wake. The picture starts with one. But he bounces back on his feet like an acrobat, or a Weeble. During the summer in which ''Vargas'' is set, Victor meets his match when he runs into Judy (Judy Marte), all swanlike cool. She's hanging out with her friend Melonie (Melonie Diaz) at the neighborhood pool where they're spotted by Victor and his fellow Mack manqué, Harold (Kevin Rivera). Between them they have less game than a broken PlayStation 2, but they scheme to win the girls over anyway.
Things get complicated when Victor's whole world gets involved in his romances. He seeks help in his suit from Judy's little brother, who demands in return an introduction to Victor's sister. Overhearing all these negotiations makes Nino decide that he wants an introduction to the world of manly conquests that he imagines his brother inhabits.
All of this scheming is a terrible affront to the grandmother, an Old World type battling to keep the rot outside from infecting her family. Victor, in particular, seems unbelievable to her; if she had holy water, she'd probably use it to draw a circle around her grandson.
Though the picture finds comedy in the chasm that exists between this feisty old woman and her grandchildren, Mr. Sollett is careful not to mock it. Victor needs his grandmother, and the climactic misunderstanding that threatens to disrupt the household is touching and energetically funny. In this blissfully ripe moment about the discomfort of working at cross purposes, Mr. Sollett pulls off the old-school trick of simultaneously inducing a laugh and a lump in the throat. Go ahead and swallow, though, it's all good for you.
The ''Vargas'' casting is magical; the new-to-movies actors assume the roles like they were born to play them. They have no actor's tricks to fall back on, or ready-made performer's clichés to hide behind, which is an enormous part of their appeal. (Mr. Rasuk and Ms. Marte also appeared in Mr. Sollett's debut short, ''Five Feet High and Rising,'' which was a kind of rehearsal for a swimming-pool meeting in ''Vargas.'' The recent maturity in their faces hasn't dampened their sparkle.)
Mr. Sollett dramatizes the roughhouse eagerness of the kids in ''Vargas'' with such clear-eyed charm that it's only afterward that you realize that though each of the scenes seems anecdotal and self-contained, they all move the picture forward. And the director doesn't cheapen ''Vargas'' by splashing it with overbearing melodrama; the comedy develops naturally because Victor and his family take everything so seriously. It's part of the egocentrism of being a teenager: a returned phone call has mythic repercussion and the cancellation of a favorite TV show feels like a personal insult.
The humor also comes from Victor's no-nonsense grandmother sharing a similar, simple view of life, an old-fashioned rigidity, where she has to fight off the evils that threaten to claim the young members of her family, who are more worldly than she could possibly imagine. The Vargas children scramble around her to maintain the facade of innocence they believe she needs to see, yet they really are innocents.
Mr. Sollett's accomplishment is the film's matter-of-fact solidity; he makes you wonder what his creations are doing when they're off screen. Such a level of achievement is almost unheard of in veteran filmmakers, let alone in a director's first feature-length film. It is what reminds us that we're seeing something special. Mr. Solett communicates his affection for his characters to us, and it's one we come to share.
The film's determined finesse is in line with Victor's. The hero gets the girl and he rises in our estimation because he proves he's worthy of her. The poised, charismatic Judy would be the star in anybody's sky. Don't be put off by the vague, sitcomish title. ''Raising Victor Vargas'' is a true find, a picture with a vital daffiness that's all its own, rather that a film that lives on the leavings of other movies.
RAISING VICTOR VARGAS
Directed by Peter Sollett; written by Mr. Sollett, based on a story by Mr. Sollett and Eva Vives; director of photography, Tim Orr; edited by Myron Kerstein; music by Roy Nathanson and Bill Ware; production designer, Judy Becker; produced by Alain de la Mata, Robin O'Hara, Scott Macaulay and Mr. Sollett; released by Samuel Goldwyn Films/Fireworks Pictures. Running time: 88 minutes. This film 
~

~
In ''The Hours'' Nicole Kidman tunnels like a ferret into the soul of a woman besieged by excruciating bouts of mental illness. As you watch her wrestle with the demon of depression, it is as if its torment has never been shown on the screen before. Directing her desperate, furious stare into the void, her eyes not really focusing, Ms. Kidman, in a performance of astounding bravery, evokes the savage inner war waged by a brilliant mind against a system of faulty wiring that transmits a searing, crazy static into her brain.
But since that woman is the English writer Virginia Woolf (a prosthetic nose helps Ms. Kidman achieve an uncanny physical resemblance), her struggle is a losing battle. On March 28, 1941, Woolf, hounded by inner voices while in the throes of her fourth breakdown, put a stone in her pocket and drowned herself in the Ouse River near the English country house she shared with her husband, Leonard. And in the opening scene of ''The Hours,'' the eloquent, somber screen adaptation of Michael Cunningham's meditation on that suicide (it won the 1998 Pulitzer Prize for fiction), Woolf scrawls an anguished farewell letter to her husband, then hurries into the muddy water like Joan of Arc embracing the fire, accompanied by the churning, ethereal strains of Philip Glass's score.
The deeply moving film, directed by Stephen Daldry (''Billy Elliot'') from a screenplay by David Hare that cuts to the bone, is an amazingly faithful screen adaptation of a novel that would seem an unlikely candidate for a movie. A delicate, layered reflection that skips around through time, ''The Hours,'' which opens today in New York, is Mr. Cunningham's homage to Woolf's first great novel, ''Mrs. Dalloway,'' published in 1925.
Woolf's novel details a day in the life of Clarissa Dalloway, a conventional upper-class Englishwoman giving a party, who experiences nagging intimations of the more adventurous life she might have led. On the same day, Septimus Warren Smith, a character in the novel whom she never meets but with whom she shares some of the same observations, commits suicide. Five years ago ''Mrs. Dalloway'' was adapted into a shallow, unsatisfying film starring Vanessa Redgrave. In accomplishing the virtually impossible feat of bringing to the screen that novel's introspective essence, the director and the screenwriter of ''The Hours'' have righted a wrong, albeit by proxy, through Mr. Cunningham's intuitive channeling.
A central idea animating ''Mrs. Dalloway'' and embodied in its stream-of-consciousness language is that people who never meet, like Clarissa Dalloway and Septimus Warren Smith, are connected by experiencing the same external events. ''The Hours'' extends that idea through the decades to celebrate the timelessness of great literature by placing the author, her fictional alter ego and two of her latter-day readers in the same sphere of consciousness.
Interweaving flashbacks from Woolf's life as she was writing ''Mrs. Dalloway'' with scenes from the lives of Laura Brown (Julianne Moore), a Southern California housewife and mother in 1951, and Clarissa Vaughan (Meryl Streep), a New York book editor living in contemporary Greenwich Village, their stories blend into a lofty, mystical theme and variations on Woolf's novel.
Laura, who is depressed and agitated, is reading ''Mrs. Dalloway'' on the same day she is baking a birthday cake for her husband, Dan (John C. Reilly), a blunt, hale World War II veteran who dotes on her and barely notices her anguish. Observing and absorbing Laura's distress is her timid, fiercely clinging young son, Richie (Jack Rovello). While baking the cake, Laura receives a surprise visit from a brightly perky neighbor, Kitty (Toni Collette), who is about to go into the hospital to be tested for cancer and admits she's frightened.
Meanwhile, in New York, Clarissa Vaughan (named after Woolf's character) is planning a celebration for her closest friend, Richard Brown (Ed Harris), a poet in the advanced stages of AIDS who has just won a prestigious award. As the movie folds these stories together, it emerges that Richard is Laura's grown-up son. And in a huge risk that pays off, the movie gives the dying poet a sudden flashback to the scared little boy he was (and fundamentally still is). Another bold surreal touch imagines Laura lying on a bed that's suddenly engulfed by the river that took Woolf.
Clarissa and Richard were lovers when they were younger, but both eventually chose partners of the same sex. Richard had a long affair with Louis Waters (Jeff Daniels), now a college professor in San Francisco, who shows up for the celebration of the award. Clarissa has lived for years with a woman, Sally Lester (Allison Janney), and has a college-age daughter, Julia (Claire Danes), from an unknown sperm donor.
Woolf herself was attracted to both men and women, and although her literary alter ego, Mrs. Dalloway, is married to a member of Parliament, on the day of the party her mind darts back to a kiss exchanged with another woman years earlier. In the movie, Woolf's sister Vanessa Bell (Miranda Richardson) visits from London with her family. And Woolf, in a moment of panic, plants a desperate, passionate kiss on Vanessa's mouth. In California, Laura Brown spontaneously reaches out to Kitty with a lingering kiss that is more than polite.
Some of the movie's most wrenching moments show Leonard Woolf (Stephen Dillane) frantically reaching out to his troubled wife and being rebuffed. It's not that the Woolfs don't love each other, but the agony Virginia is enduring can't be touched by love or reason. These moments bring home the film's deepest and most intimidating insight about the essential aloneness of the individual and its feminist corollary: that appearances to the contrary, women in their deepest selves do not and should not define themselves in terms of men.
Clarissa is the most grounded character, probably because she has been the truest to her instincts and has the most love to give back. When Richard, whose good days have dwindled to none, accuses Clarissa (whom he calls Mrs. Dalloway) of forcing him to stay alive, it's obviously true. Mr. Harris, more than matching his tumultuous performance in ''Pollock,'' creates a wrenching, incendiary portrait of a man ravaged with illness, who thrashes with rage and bitterness, his emotions burning out of control like a torched oil slick on a contaminated lake.
Ms. Streep's frayed, moody Clarissa is no hovering, haloed angel of mercy but an intensely self-aware, vulnerable urbanite worn down by her efforts to do the right thing. Through Ms. Streep's performance, the movie captures, like no film I can remember, the immediate, continuing interaction of experience and memory in the instinctive human drive to infuse the moment with meaning and value.
Ms. Moore's Laura, although a reader, lacks Clarissa's or Richard's literary armament and is the more vulnerable for it. A wistful, frightened creature embarrassed by her own china-doll fragility, she longs to escape a life that feels all wrong but has little notion of where to go or what to do. Ms. Moore brings to the role the same luminous demureness that colors her portrayal of an innocent, well-meaning Connecticut housewife whose world shatters in ''Far From Heaven.''
All these brooding, complicated people are prototypical Woolfian figures blessed and afflicted with the same feverish imaginations, perplexing ambiguities and brightly etched memories of their younger, more hopeful selves. Yet for all its sexual complexity, ''The Hours'' is not really about sex. The film, like the novel, is a sustained meditation on connection, human possibility, the elusive dream of happiness and the sometimes seductive call of death.
Although suicide eventually tempts three of the film's characters, ''The Hours'' is not an unduly morbid film. Clear eyed and austerely balanced would be a more accurate description, along with magnificently written and acted. Mr. Glass's surging minimalist score, with its air of cosmic abstraction, serves as ideal connective tissue for a film that breaks down temporal barriers.
Appropriately it is Woolf who has the definitive final word on the questions lurking in the backs of the minds of the film's characters with their flickering life forces.
Leonard Woolf, querying his wife about her decision to kill off a character in ''Mrs. Dalloway,'' asks her why.
She answers carefully, ''Someone has to die that the rest of us should value life more.''
''The Hours'' 
~
Roman Polanski's new movie, ''The Pianist,'' is based on the memoirs of Wladyslaw Szpilman, a star of Polish radio and cafe society in the 1930's and a member of Warsaw's assimilated Jewish middle class, who lived through the Nazi occupation and the Warsaw ghetto. Szpilman's recollections, published shortly after the war, offer, like other such books, a deeply paradoxical impression of the Holocaust. Accounts of survival, that is, are both representative and anomalous; they at once record this all but unimaginable historical catastrophe and, without intentional mendacity or inaccuracy, distort it.
The reason for this could not be simpler. Most of the intended victims of Nazi genocide did not survive; the typical Jewish experience in 1940's Europe was death. One of the main genres that allow later generations access to this time thus presents an inevitably unrepresentative picture of it.
We naturally identify with the protagonists of these books, and the characters based on them in movies and plays, and so imagine that we would have been among the lucky ones, even if the real odds suggest otherwise. (We also comfort ourselves in the vain belief that, had we been there, we would have bravely defied the Nazis, risking our own well-being to help their victims.) When it is not treated with the uneasy sentimentality reserved for miracles, survival -- whether through dumb luck, resilience, the kindness of strangers or some combination of these -- is often viewed with a deep and bitter sense of the absurd.
Mr. Polanski, who was a Jewish child in Krakow when the Germans arrived in September 1939, presents Szpilman's story with bleak, acid humor and with a ruthless objectivity that encompasses both cynicism and compassion. When death is at once so systematically and so capriciously dispensed, survival becomes a kind of joke. By the end of the film, Szpilman, brilliantly played by Adrien Brody, comes to resemble one of Samuel Beckett's gaunt existential clowns, shambling through a barren, bombed-out landscape clutching a jar of pickles. He is like the walking punchline to a cosmic jest of unfathomable cruelty.
Perhaps because of his own experiences, Mr. Polanski approaches this material with a calm, fierce authority. This is certainly the best work Mr. Polanski has done in many years (which, unfortunately, is not saying a lot), and it is also one of the very few nondocumentary movies about Jewish life and death under the Nazis that can be called definitive (which is saying a lot). And -- again paradoxically -- this is achieved by realizing the modest, deliberate intention to tell a single person's story, to recreate a specific and finite set of events. (Ronald Harwood's script does take some necessary liberties with Szpilman's account, but these seem justified by the demands of movie storytelling.)
The ambition to produce a comprehensive vision -- a single spectacle adequate to the Holocaust -- ultimately defeated Steven Spielberg's admirable and serious ''Schindler's List.'' Mr. Polanski, in staging a narrow, partial slice of history, has made a film that is both drier and more resonant than Mr. Spielberg's.
One of Mr. Polanski's trademarks is what might be called (to continue multiplying paradoxes) a humane sadism. He has always been fascinated by what happens to weak, ordinary people -- Mia Farrow in ''Rosemary's Baby,'' for instance, or Jack Nicholson in ''Chinatown'' -- when they are intruded upon by evil forces more powerful than they, and he punishes his actors, peeling back their vanity to make them show the face of humanity under duress.
One of Mr. Brody's most appealing features -- from ''King of the Hill'' 10 years ago through such varied and underseen pictures as ''Restaurant,'' ''Summer of Sam'' and ''Bread and Roses'' more recently -- is his quick-witted, almost smart-alecky cockiness. His Szpilman, in the first section of ''The Pianist,'' has the gait of a self-satisfied dandy and the smug smile of a man who takes charm and good fortune as his birthright. As he plays piano in a broadcast studio, an explosion rattles the building. He ducks, wipes some plaster off his sleeve, and keeps playing. Later Szpilman refuses to allow the widespread panic at the German invasion to interfere with more pressing matters, like the seduction of a star-struck young woman named Dorota (Emilia Fox).
History, the occupying Germans and Mr. Polanski then conspire to wipe the smirk off his face. The Nazi takeover is followed by a swift, brutal chronicle of violation and humiliation as the Szpilman family are stripped of their possessions, their dignity (the elderly father, played by Frank Finlay, is beaten by a German soldier for daring to use the sidewalk) and their home. With the other Jews of Warsaw, they are herded into the ghetto, a captive labor force subject to continual culling by disease, starvation and the random violence of their tormentors.
Mr. Polanski, working in Poland for the first time in 40 years (and also in Prague), reconstructs the look and rhythm of life in the ghetto with care and sobriety. You feel the dread and confusion of the inhabitants, and you also observe their intuitive, futile attempts to master the situation -- circulating underground newspapers, smuggling contraband through the walls and quietly arming themselves for resistance.
The survival instinct is shown to exist in a weird, numb state that combines defiance and resignation. And Szpilman's evasion of death involves a curious combination of pluck, passivity and arrogance. He is the only member of his family who avoids being shipped to the extermination camps, and he later manages to escape from the ghetto altogether. During the 1943 ghetto uprising, he is locked in a secure apartment in the gentile part of the city, and he watches helplessly from the window as the partisans begin their brave, doomed resistance to the German occupiers.
From this moment forward ''The Pianist'' -- which opens today in New York and Los Angeles -- becomes a tour de force of claustrophobia and surreal desperation, and Mr. Polanski ruthlessly strips his Szpilman down to the bare human minimum. He is neither an especially heroic nor an entirely sympathetic fellow, and by the end he has been reduced to a nearly animal condition -- sick, haggard and terrified. But then the film's climax offers the most dramatic paradox of all: a glimpse of how the impulses of civilization survive in the midst of unparalleled barbarism. When I first saw this film last spring in Cannes (where it won the Golden Palm), I thought Szpilman's encounter, in the war's last days, with a music-loving Nazi officer (Thomas Kretschmann) courted sentimentality by associating the love of art with moral decency, an equation the Nazis themselves, steeped in Beethoven and Wagner, definitively refuted. But on a second viewing, the scene, scored to the ravishing, sorrowful music of Chopin, was a painful and ridiculous testament to just how bizarre the European catastrophe of the last century was.
Szpilman may have been the butt of a monstrous joke, but the last laugh -- appropriately deadpan -- was his. ''What will you do when this is over?'' the officer asks. ''I'll play piano on Polish radio,'' Szpilman replies. Which is exactly what he did until his death two years ago.
''The Pianist'' 
~
Hollywood is notoriously adept at punching emotional buttons that send a lump into your throat and make your eyes well up. But when was the last time those Pavlovian responses were connected to a lode of emotional truth volatile enough to resonate long after the movie was over?
''Antwone Fisher,'' the story of a troubled young African-American sailor whose sessions with a Navy psychiatrist prod him to embark on a scary but ultimately healing journey of self-discovery, is a movie so profoundly in touch with its own feelings that it transcends its formulaic tics. If the inspirational ending slaps two too many synthetic cherries on the sundae, the movie still induces the sort of catharsis that leaves you feeling released, enlightened and in deeper touch with humanity.
The directorial debut of Denzel Washington, who portrays that psychiatrist, ''Antwone Fisher'' is an archetypal male weepie in the tradition of ''Good Will Hunting,'' which it strongly resembles but finally surpasses. As a director Mr. Washington shows a confident grasp of cinematic narrative in a hearty meat-and-potatoes style. But the most remarkable aspect of his behind-the-camera debut is his brilliantly surefooted handling of actors.
Virtually all the performances, down to the smallest role, exhibit the same mixture of detailed refinement and raw honesty that characterize Mr. Washington's best work as a screen actor.
As Jerome Davenport, a psychiatrist whose stiff upper lip and grin-and-bear-it attitude have begun to undermine his own marriage, Mr. Washington is so sensitively reactive that his performance seems more lived than acted. And from Derek Luke, the newcomer who plays the movie's title character, he has elicited a compelling and complex character study that strikes a universal chord. Mr. Luke's performance is hands down the year's most auspicious screen acting debut.
This charismatic young actor has the challenge of conveying the seesawing moods of a bright, angry young man scarred by childhood rejection and abuse, whose streak of hotheadedness threatens to get him bounced out of the Navy. Juggling his hurt and fear, with a ferocious desire to face down his demons, Antwone is a sensitive artist (he writes poetry and draws) who, given the chance, lunges headlong after the self-knowledge that will help him deal with that hurt. As the film follows Antwone's efforts to break through his own defensive shell, it raises issues that cut beneath conventional therapeutic wisdom about child abuse and its repercussions. In flashing back to show the excruciating humiliations of Antwone's childhood, the screenplay forcefully connects them to a larger pattern of African-American social dysfunction.
Early in Antwone's therapy the doctor gives him John W. Blassingame's book ''The Slave Community,'' which theorizes that the harsh discipline Antwone (like countless children like him) endured as a foster child growing up in Cleveland was an internalized reflection of the abuse his ancestors suffered at the hands of slave owners. Those slave owners, it suggests, loomed as punishing surrogate parents, wielding far more authority than the slaves' own biological parents.
To any child, the behavior of an ultimate authority figure, no matter how oppressive, tends to define how that child wields parental power later in life. According to the theory, that pattern of instilled self-loathing established in the days of slavery has been passed down from generation to generation.
The scenes of the cruelties inflicted on the young Antwone and his two foster brothers by their black foster mother Mrs. Tate (Novella Nelson) are as chilling as they are graphic. She continually reviles them with demeaning racial epithets and uses the flimsiest excuses to administer severe corporal punishment. In one scene the young Antwone, his hands tied, is savagely beaten with a wet dish towel for supposedly dirtying the walls. In another, she menaces the boy with a flaming torch made from a rolled-up newspaper.
What makes her tirades all the more destructive is the tone of thunderous moral judgment that informs her racial invective. A few years later Antwone is further humiliated by a cousin, Nadine (Yolonda Ross), living in the Tate home, who coerces him into playing sexual games.
The film was written by the real-life Antwone Fisher, an aspiring screenwriter whose story first caught the attention of Todd Black (one of the movie's producers) a decade ago when Mr. Fisher worked as a security guard for Sony Pictures in Los Angeles. Before turning his story into a movie, Mr. Fisher wrote a memoir, ''Finding Fish,'' which was published last year.
The movie first encounters Antwone at the Southern California naval base, where he is a wary, hypersensitive outsider who lashes out at the tiniest hint of a racial slur. After one too many incidents in which he loses his head, he is sent to Davenport for three therapy sessions that will determine his future in the Navy. At first Antwone refuses to talk. But once he starts telling his story, the emotional floodgates open.
Flashbacks, prompted by the therapy sessions, show Antwone's desolate childhood. Born in prison two months after his father was murdered by an ex-girlfriend, he lived in an orphanage for two years. When his mother never appeared to claim him, he landed in the home of the Tates, a storefront preacher and his wife. Thrown out of the Tate house after standing up to his foster mother, he stayed briefly in a men's shelter, then joined the Navy after a criminal escapade that nearly cost him his life.
As Antwone grows to trust Davenport, the psychiatrist relaxes the normally strict boundaries of the doctor-patient relationship. Antwone becomes a surrogate son to the doctor, who is himself in denial about the pain of his childless marriage.
Under Davenport's tutelage, Antwone, who has remained virginal because of his sexual abuse, begins dating Cheryl (Joy Bryant), also a sailor, who intuits his basic goodness and gently nurtures his self-esteem. In the final step, Davenport urges Antwone to return to Cleveland to search for his biological family. The last quarter of the film follows him on a journey that proves fruitful in ways that are at once agonizing and freeing.
If ''Antwone Fisher'' is a bluntly inspirational film promoting the benefits of a tough-love style of therapy, it doesn't pretend that Antwone's breakthroughs are quick fixes. Where ''Good Will Hunting'' implied that one good cry could work a psychological miracle, ''Antwone Fisher'' acknowledges that such a cry is just the first of many on a long, bumpy emotional road. If the movie's sugar-coated ending leaves a hint of saccharine, its beautifully balanced performances and faith in its characters keep it honest despite itself.
''Antwone Fisher'' 
~
Casting a measured gaze on a shameful chapter of Australian history, ''Rabbit-Proof Fence'' makes no bones about who is right and wrong in its devastating portrayal of that country's disgraceful treatment of its Aborginal population for much of the last century. Although the movie, adapted from a book by Doris Pilkington Garimara, pushes emotional buttons and simplifies its true story to give it the clean narrative sweep of an extended folk ballad, it never goes dramatically overboard.
On the side of right are the Australian Aborigines whose families were torn apart by a government policy of forcibly removing children of mixed race from their Outback communities and transporting them to settlement camps hundreds of miles away. Once in the camps, they were forbidden to speak their native language and were indoctrinated into the religion and customs of the dominant white culture. Eventually they were integrated into the general population as domestic servants and farm laborers.
On the side of wrong is the Australian government, which, for more than half a century (from 1905 to 1971) carried out this appalling program of legalized kidnapping. ''Rabbit-Proof Fence'' is set in 1931, when the executor of that policy was A. O. Neville (Kenneth Branagh), a man so intransigently certain of its ultimate benefit to everyone involved that he makes Rudyard Kipling seem benign.
The chief protector of Aborigines in Western Australia in 1931 when malignant racial theories were in ascendancy throughout the world, Neville is the legal guardian of all Aboriginal people in that state. Convinced that the Aborigines are dying out, he is committed to hastening their disappearance by enforcing a law that forbids children of mixed marriages to marry full-blooded Aborigines. In one scene, Neville smugly pulls out a chart that supposedly proves how, in three generations after an interracial marriage, all Aboriginal characteristics have disappeared in the offspring.
Christine Olsen's subtle but biting screenplay and Mr. Branagh's understated performance refrain from portraying Neville as an overtly fiendish monster. As he executes decisions that are all taken in a spirit of benign paternalism, he comes across as the apotheosis of the kind of blind racism that takes for granted the superiority of white Western culture.
This sturdy, touching movie, directed by Phillip Noyce, who also oversaw ''The Quiet American,'' personalizes this historical outrage by telling the story of three young girls who escape from a settlement and set out to make the 1,200-mile trek back home on foot. The events are based on the experiences of Ms. Garimara's mother, Molly (Everlyn Sampi), who is 14 at the time of the movie; her 8-year-old sister Daisy (Tianna Sansbury), and their 10-year-old cousin Gracie (Laura Monaghan). All three are mixed-race children fathered by itinerant white fence workers.
The story begins in the tiny depot of Jigalog in northwestern Australia on the edge of the Gibson Desert. Coursing through this Aboriginal community is a rabbit-proof fence. Built to keep the country's rabbits on one side and its pasture land on the other, it spans the entire length of Australia from north to south.
Hearing that the three girls are running wild in Jigalog, Neville authorizes their removal to the Moore River Native Settlement 1,200 miles away. But when his deputy, Constable Riggs (Jason Clarke), drives to Jigalog to pick them up, he must overcome the resistance of the girls' mothers from whose arms they are forcibly wrested. The Moore Settlement resembles a spartan rural orphanage with dormitory housing and strict regimentation. When children try to escape, they are retrieved by Moodoo (David Gulpilil), an experienced black tracker, and punished with solitary confinement.
For Molly, who bridles at the daily humiliation, the final straw comes when the girls are told they have no mothers. One day while the other children are in church, she coaxes Daisy and Gracie to flee with her into the woods. The bulk of the movie follows them on a three-month trek through forest, field and desert, during much of which they use the rabbit-proof fence to guide them home. As the news of their remarkable elusiveness reaches Jigalog, Molly and Daisy's mother, Maude (Ningali Lawford), and their grandmother, Frinda (Myarn Lawford), hold a vigil in which they chant and send signals by tapping on the fence.
If ''Rabbit-Proof Fence,'' which opens today in Manhattan and Los Angeles, has the upbeat tone and deliberate pace of a ballad, Molly is its radiant folk heroine. Profoundly intuitive, indomitably courageous, endowed with superhuman resilience, she is the stuff of legend. And as played by Ms. Sampi, she emits a steady glow even in moments of desperation.
The story could easily have been treated as a brutally suspenseful manhunt in which the girls survive any number of narrow escapes from their pursuers. But in Mr. Noyce's hands their journey is touched with enchantment, and the movie becomes a paean to the beauty of the Australian countryside and the decency of most of the common people who aid the fugitives.
Under Molly's resourceful guidance, the girls are able to find enough food and water to keep them going. If their continued well-being seems unreal, that's part of the movie's myth-making strategy. As the story jumps back and forth between their journey and the frustrated attempts to capture them, at moments it almost feels like a jaunty game of hide and seek.
But the spic-and-span wholesomeness of ''Rabbit-Proof Fence'' ultimately makes its sting all the sharper. Its portrait of people who see themselves as decent, self-righteously trying to eradicate another culture, has the impact of a swift, hard slap in the face.
''Rabbit-Proof Fence'' 
~
At the beginning of ''Far From Heaven,'' the camera drifts downward toward the tidy streets of Hartford, through a screen of blood-red maple leaves. It is autumn 1957, and like the New England foliage, the people of Hartford are chilled into vivid, lurid color by the frost of middle-class, midcentury propriety. The bright clothes they wear, the baroque interiors of their houses, the jarring pastel tones of their enormous cars all stand in contrast to the constriction of their emotional lives and the narrow range of expression their bizarre, disconcertingly familiar world allows.
The visual and aural texture of Todd Haynes's ardent and intelligent new film provides a kind of subliminal commentary on its story of thwarted desire and soul-killing pretense. All of the wild, unruly feeling that the characters must repress pops to life around them, in every detail of Mark Friedberg's production design, Edward Lachman's painterly cinematography, Sandy Powell's delectable costumes and, above all, the great Elmer Bernstein's sobbing, swooping score.
Mr. Bernstein's music, which plays beneath nearly every scene, puts the melody in this melodrama, and Mr. Haynes, fading breathlessly from one scene to the next, reaches moments of operatic intensity that seem disproportionate to his tale of genteel bigotry and marital dysfunction. But that's the point of the movie, and the source of its troubling beauty. It suggests that the 50's facade of normalcy -- represented by the routinized, orderly lives of Frank and Cathy Whitaker (Dennis Quaid and Julianne Moore) -- concealed both incendiary passions and a ruthless social machinery devoted to their suppression.
Of course, this is hardly a new idea; it was, indeed, part of the era's understanding of itself. ''Far From Heaven,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is both a movie about the 50's and a tribute to some of the great movies of the 50's, in particular the Technicolor melodramas that Douglas Sirk made in collaboration with the producer Ross Hunter for Universal Pictures. (It happens that Focus Features, the distributor of Mr. Haynes's movie, is Universal's newly reorganized art-film subsidiary.)
Those pictures -- including ''Magnificent Obsession,'' ''Written on the Wind,'' ''Imitation of Life'' and ''All That Heaven Allows'' -- were popular with audiences in their day, but they were regarded with condescension by critics and other sophisticates suspicious of their soapy, maudlin extravagance. As was the case with so much postwar American popular culture, the subtlety and complexity of Sirk's art -- in particular his subversive knack for tucking social criticism and psychological insight into stories governed by the constraints of the Production Code and the conventions of the tear-jerker -- were appreciated only in retrospect, in part through Sirk's influence on later filmmakers, notably Ranier Werner Fassbinder.
Like Fassbinder, Mr. Haynes, whose previous features are ''Poison,'' ''Safe'' and ''The Velvet Goldmine,'' is interested both in updating Sirk and in reproducing his fluid, incandescent style. He wants, in effect, to appeal to that part of the audience that is flattered by knowing, analytical entertainments and, at the same time, to seduce us out of our intellectual cocoon into a state of pure, unbridled feeling -- to bridge the gap between the Eisenhower-era housewives who were Sirk's original audience and the aesthetes who secured his belated entry into the auteurist pantheon.
This is a remarkable ambition, but also an eminently sensible one: the union of art and sensation, intellect and feeling, mass appeal and aesthetic refinement is something the movies are uniquely able to promise, and occasionally, when a filmmaker possesses the right mixture of calculation and compassion, able to deliver.
For a director who got his start working with Barbie dolls (in ''Superstar,'' his harrowing short film about the life of Karen Carpenter), Mr. Haynes is fiercely devoted to his actors. Ms. Moore, who played the unhappy suburban housewife in ''Safe,'' here plays a heartbreaking variation on the theme. At first, Cathy is almost a caricature of domestic fulfillment, driving her daughter home from ballet class in a sky-blue station wagon, planning her annual cocktail party with her best friend, Eleanor (the splendidly wicked Patricia Clarkson), and welcoming a reporter and a photographer from the local society pages into her meticulously decorated home.
But Mr. Haynes never mocks Cathy's happiness, even as he chronicles its unraveling. Though her face is framed by stiff curls and masked with rouge and lipstick, Ms. Moore (who was pregnant during the filming) glows with warmth, curiosity and goodness -- the very qualities, Mr. Haynes suggest, that cause Cathy so much trouble.
Her life is complicated by the discovery of her husband's homosexuality and then (perhaps consequently) by her friendship with Raymond Deagan (Dennis Haysbert), a black gardener. Their relationship -- chaste, but charged with mutual longing -- and Frank's sexuality are, of course, matters that Sirk could have addressed only obliquely. But though he is more candid than he could have been in the 50's, Mr. Haynes refrains from tearing aside the veil of euphemism and hypocrisy that shrouds his characters' lives. For one thing, he is as fond of the language of the period as he is of its interior decoration; the dialogue he has written is highly stylized, at times almost to the point of Coen brothers campiness. Cathy scolds her son when he says things like ''shucks'' and ''jeez,'' and Eleanor reels off a litany of insinuating synonyms for homosexual (the funniest of which turns out to be ''wickedly successful Gotham art dealer'').
But by observing -- and even, to some extent, exaggerating -- the decorum of the era, Mr. Haynes gives ''Far From Heaven'' an emotional impact that could not have been achieved by conventionally realistic means. The most casual moments are suffused with a feeling of emotional extremity; the air is as charged and threatening as it might be in a horror film. Everyone in this world seems terribly alone -- Cathy increasingly so -- and at the same time under constant surveillance, spied upon and gossiped about, an instant away from betrayal or ostracism.
The film's rawer moments -- when Frank explodes into obscenity, when Cathy catches him kissing a man, when Raymond's young daughter is attacked by a group of white schoolboys -- feel almost unbearably brutal. And the actors invest their smallest gestures with the weight of inexpressible feeling.
Mr. Quaid's handsome face is twisted with suffering and self-loathing, and his performance is all the more shattering because he thwarts our compassion. Frank's misery transmutes, all too easily, into cruelty directed at his wife. Mr. Haysbert is equally powerful in a performance that goes in the opposite direction. On the surface, Raymond is all reticence, decency and good manners -- liberal Hollywood's dream of the noble, upwardly mobile Negro. But Mr. Haysbert and Mr. Haynes conspire to subvert this stereotype, too. Along with Viola Davis, who plays Cathy's housekeeper, they pay homage to Sirk's grandest, most radical picture, ''Imitation of Life,'' in which Juanita Moore took the cinema archetype of the selfless black servant and turned her into a human being.
And this, in effect, is what ''Far From Heaven'' accomplishes for all of its characters. It rediscovers the aching, desiring humanity in a genre -- and a period -- too often subjected to easy parody or ironic appropriation. In a word, it's divine.
''Far From Heaven'' 
~
Like all great doomed affairs, ''Talk to Her,'' the closing-night presentation of the New York Film Festival, is full of lovely, sweet suffering. And when it's over, the realization of how much the movie means to you really sinks in; you can't get it out of your heart.
Pedro Almodóvar has created a tragic comedy about need, its liberating and shackling powers. Movies haven't been so rapturous about characters plummeting to an awful end at least since the last Almodóvar film, ''All About My Mother'' (1999). But he doesn't mine the comic strip soap opera mystique so extravagantly here; everything falls into place with an almost surreal delicacy. The dense and deeply touching ''Talk to Her'' makes one think he has been listening to a lot of songs by the Smiths, those former post-punk potentates, particularly the band's classic, ''Girlfriend in a Coma.''
Benigno (Javier Cámara) is a nurse who sits patiently at the side of his unconscious girlfriend, Alicia (Leonor Watling), attending to her needs. What he does is talk to her, moving slowly, gently; his honeyed voice is a part of his physicality, going along with his meticulous, deliberate movement. He's a delicate, strangely assured stuffed animal of a man. And as in the compelling peculiarity of the Smiths -- a sensibility that links the director and the band -- the film takes fascinatingly soigné turns.
Initially the picture is about sympathy; Marco (Darío Grandinetti), taken by Benigno's lead, ministers to his own girlfriend, Lydia (Rosario Flores), who is also in a coma. Both women were intensely physical: Alicia was a dancer, and Lydia, a bullfighter, was gored.
With his placid face and caramel speaking tones, Benigno is the very center of the film, literally and spiritually. In terms of visual schemes, Mr. Almodóvar uses a dark, sweet richness and camera movements as deliberate and generous as Benigno. And we learn very slowly what depths of benign malice this apparently bland, kind man -- and this superb filmmaker at the grown-up peak of his powers -- is capable of. It is revealed that Benigno is an obsessive with no real ties to Alicia; she has become his after falling into unconsciousness, and the depth of his devotion becomes both a love story and a horror story. By the end of his story we're left as stunned and loyal as Marco.
By the end Mr. Almodóvar flips the script and demands not just sympathy but empathy for someone who you wouldn't think deserved it. It's a movie about being trapped in various kinds of prisons, spiritual, physical and finally literal. (His ''All About My Mother'' and the 1997 ''Live Flesh'' were also about being imprisoned.) And we see that ''Talk to Her'' is not about sympathy but about loyalty, and the picture with its crafty twists of fate earns our loyalty as well.
It's the most mature work this director has ever brought to the screen. His fearlessness used to lend itself to bizarre, wild plot turns that suggested he was out to tickle himself, a practical joker who loved giving his own pictures a hot foot.
The jabbering neuroses of his chattering characters grew out of Mr. Almodóvar himself; there was something lovable about his compulsive desire to entertain. Now the movies have the freakish, elegant calm of early Tennessee Williams, and the dramatic information is slipped into the movie with devastating panache: a love tap delivered with the force of a speeding car.
Mr. Almodóvar's purview started out as a lewd, slapstick version of the heightened melodrama of the 50's director Douglas Sirk: if ''Magnificent Obsession'' had starred a sexual Lucille Ball. But the director has moved past candy-colored Fassbinder with a sense of humor.
His plot turns are no longer as sharp and cruel, which was fun. (It's probably fitting that Marco Bellochio, who must also have influenced this director, was in the festival this year with ''My Mother's Smile.'') Mr. Almodóvar couldn't be more unhurried and assured about what he's doing; ''Talk to Her'' is evidence of his own evolving sensibility.
His movies have not lost their ability to startle, but the wayward ingenuity no longer gives vent to wild, delirious shocks. His metabolism has slowed; he doesn't cram in the lively excess for its own sake.
Yet the slippery mischievous streak remains, and ''Talk to Her'' shows how reliable he has become at marrying suspense, comedy and tragedy. He has become more capable than ever of not only shifting tones but also balancing several tones at once, answering questions and simultaneously deepening the mystery.
Mr. Almodóvar's appreciation of flesh -- no other director photographs skin so lovingly -- itself becomes a plot point. Benigno generously strokes Alicia, and the director evokes and subtly parodies movies like ''Love Story.'' Skin, and sex, are the heart of the trouble, and there's a grandly ludicrous scene about how deeply unavoidable sex is and the troubles it can raise. ''Talk to Her'' is totally in love with passion, and with love as we are -- more than may be good for it.
TALK TO HER
Written (in Spanish, with English subtitles) and directed by Pedro Almodóvar; director of photography, Javier Aguirresarobe; edited by José Salcedo; music by Alberto Iglesias; production designer, Antxon Gómez; produced by Agustín Almodóvar; released by Sony Pictures Classics. Running time: 112 minutes. This film is not rated. Shown with a 13-minute short, Esther Rots's ''Play With Me,'' tomorrow at 8:30 p.m. at Avery Fisher Hall, as the closing-night film of the 40th New York Film Festival.
WITH: Javier Cámara (Benigno), Darío Grandinetti (Marco), Leonor Watling (Alicia), Rosario Flores (Lydia), Geraldine Chaplin (Katarina), Mariola Fuentes (Rosa) and Lola Dueñas (Matilde).

~
OF all the dramatic transformations Jack Nicholson has undergone in his 44-year screen career, none is more astonishing than his embodiment of a retired, widowed insurance executive from Omaha in Alexander Payne's film ''About Schmidt.'' Plodding in a weary, stiff-legged shuffle, his shoulders bowed, his features half-frozen into the guarded, sunken expression of someone who has devoted decades of thought to actuarial calculation, his character, Warren Schmidt, is a staid Middle American everyman who finds himself adrift at the precarious age of 66.
Warren may be the least colorful character Mr. Nicholson has ever played on the screen, and the role inspires this great actor's least flamboyant performance. The Mephistophelean eyebrows remain at half-staff, and the ferocious bad-boy grin that has illuminated many of his most famous roles with jagged lightning is stifled.
Instead of flash, what Mr. Nicholson brings to his role is a sorrowful awareness of human complexity whose emotional depth matches anything he has done in the movies before.
''About Schmidt,'' which opens the 40th annual New York Film Festival tonight at Lincoln Center (it is to be released nationally in December), is much more than a character study of a man some might dismiss as bland. The third movie directed by Mr. Payne, who was born in Omaha and set his last film, ''Election,'' in the same territory, ''About Schmidt'' lays out an expansive, impressively even-handed vision of life in contemporary Middle America.
Like ''Election,'' in which a high school political contest became a microcosm of America's hyper-competitive political climate, this film (based on a novel by Louis Begley) reverberates outward in its social implications. The Warren Schmidts of this world and their friends and families, it suggests, constitute a quietly humming, stabilizing collective engine in American society. An out-of-date term that might still be applied to these decent middle-class folk who work hard, respect their neighbors, attend church and obey the law is the Silent Majority.
In ''About Schmidt,'' as in ''Election'' and ''Citizen Ruth'' (the first film this director created with his screenwriting partner, Jim Taylor), the team brilliantly reconciles a double vision of American life. While one eye gazes satirically at the rigid institutions and shopworn rituals that sustain a sense of order and tradition in the heartland, the other views those same institutions with a respectful understanding of their value.
This delicate balancing act echoes those sections of Jonathan Franzen's novel ''The Corrections'' that are set in a fictionalized St. Louis. The inhabitants of this comfortable, slightly shabby world may have their demons like everybody else, but they tend to keep their disappointment and self-pity inside.
Gregarious and trusting of their neighbors, they don't expect too much out of life and remember to count their blessings at the end of the day. The screenplay has a pitch-perfect ear for the kind of Middle American vernacular typified by one character's fervently emphatic observation about another who died: ''She was a fine, fine woman.''
Where ''Election'' was a comedy --along with ''Best in Show'' probably the finest American screen comedy of the last decade -- ''About Schmidt,'' though often funny (a scene in which Warren tries to cope with a waterbed verges on slapstick), leans in a more bittersweet direction.
Peering into the future, Warren, who has spent his whole adult life calculating the life spans of others, contemplates his remaining years with a mixture of resignation, disappointment and impatience. Alone, with more time on his hands than he ever expected to have, he realizes with a mounting desperation that before he dies, he wants to feel he has made more of a difference in the world than he has so far.
What plunges Warren into this existential crisis is the sudden death of his wife, Helen (June Squibb), whom he discovers lying face down on the carpet she was vacuuming, felled by a cerebral hemorrhage. Earlier in the movie Warren has confessed in a voice-over to harboring a growing, secret loathing of this stout, gray-haired woman he has been living with for 42 years. But with Helen gone, he finds himself helpless, unable to cook a meal or keep house. After flailing around for several weeks, he impulsively flees Omaha in the 35-foot Winnebago motor home he and his wife had planned to travel in once he retired.
As Warren barrels along the highway on a circuitous journey that eventually takes him to Denver to attend the wedding of his daughter, Jeannie (Hope Davis), it is impossible not to compare this excursion to the cross-country jaunt Mr. Nicholson made in ''Easy Rider'' 33 years ago. Where the earlier trip carried the actor into the sunrise of a drug-enlightened future, ''About Schmidt'' is a psychic journey into the twilight and the past.
True, the contemporary world the movie shows includes designer drugs, hot tubs and sexually emancipated older women. But it is still more like revisiting the 1950's than squinting into the new millennium.
In countless small ways the movie illustrates how Middle American culture absorbs innovation while remaining essentially unchanged in its solid (and some might say smug) sense of its own identity. Take the wedding, in which Jeannie, to her father's stifled fury, seals her vows with Randall Hertzel (Dermot Mulroney), an air-headed waterbed salesman with a penchant for losing his and other investors' shirts in get-rich-quick schemes.
Randall wears his hair in a mullet. His biggest fan is his garrulous twice-divorced mother, Roberta (Kathy Bates), who loudly informs Warren that the bond sealing the newlyweds' happiness is their ''white hot'' sex life. Her son, she boasts, inherited his healthy sex drive from her. And in one of the movie's funniest scenes, she terrifies Warren by plopping down next to him in a hot tub and waiting for the sparks to fly.
But despite such freewheeling flourishes, the wedding turns out be a conventional affair. As thin, wobbly voices serenade the bride and groom with Dan Fogelberg's ''Longer'' and Paul Stookey's ''Wedding Song (There Is Love),'' modern ballads that are every bit as kitschy as the vintage nuptial warhorses ''I Love You Truly'' and ''Oh, Promise Me,'' the movie shows how the more things change, the more they stay the same.
Once Warren leaves Omaha, ''About Schmidt'' becomes a robust anecdotal road movie interspersed with voice-overs in which Warren composes letters to Ndugu, a 6-year-old Tanzanian boy he is sponsoring (to the tune of $22 a month) in response to a television pitch by an overseas charity. As Warren writes to the boy, he muses out loud, venting bottled-up frustrations no 6-year-old on any continent could begin to fathom.
If Warren is a decent, well-meaning individual, he is no paragon of psychological health. As a sympathetic woman he meets on the road observes, he is a ''sad, sad man.'' His daughter, to whom he never paid much attention, resents him for his emotional absence over the years, and when he belatedly tries to mend the breach, he is coldly rebuffed. His urge to make a difference crystallizes in a fruitless, self-destructive effort to talk Jeannie out of marrying Randall, who he senses is not good enough for her.
What makes this exquisitely observed slice of American screen realism transcend itself is finally its moral sensibility. The movie's quest to discover how one ordinary person can make more of a difference turns out to be as serious as its title character's. The common-sense answer it comes up with, in a final scene so unassuming that it's almost a throwaway moment, is as simple and modest as it is profoundly moving.
''About Schmidt'' 
~
The title ''Spirited Away'' could refer to what Disney has done on a corporate level to the revered Japanese animation director Hayao Miyazaki's epic and marvelous new anime fantasy. The picture is being promoted as Disney's ''Spirited Away,'' although seeing just 10 minutes of this English version of a hugely popular Japanese film will quickly disabuse any discerning viewer of the notion that it is a Disney creation. The towering, lost dreaminess at the heart of the film is an unmistakable obsession of this director. Actually, rather than Disney's ''Spirited Away, the movie could better be considered Mr. Miyazaki's ''Through the Looking Glass.''
The picture's theme is dislocation. Chihiro (voice of Daveigh Chase), moving with her parents to a new neighborhood, is pouty about leaving her old friends and school behind. Her father's attempt to take a shortcut to their new town leads the family to a settlement that looks like what he calls an abandoned theme park: acres of beautifully designed kiosks, buildings and statues.
Easily frightened and quick to voice her unhappiness, Chihiro wanders off while her parents gorge on a lunch from an unattended food stand. She encounters an apparition who warns her that she and her family have to leave before the sun goes down. But when she runs back to alert her mother and father, they've been turned into hogs, bursting out of their casual Friday garb and gobbling up everything before them.
Mr. Miyazaki's specialty is taking a primal wish of kids, transporting them to a fantasyland and then marooning them there. No one else conjures the phantasmagoric and shifting morality of dreams -- that fascinating and frightening aspect of having something that seems to represent good become evil -- in the way this master Japanese animator does.
For Chihiro each strange creature has the physical -- and inevitably psychological -- threat of a shark. Just because we know that they don't have a mean bone in their bodies doesn't make them seem any less dangerous to her. She doesn't know whom or what to trust. The initially friendly Haku, a boy with magical powers (Jason Marsden), advises Chihiro on navigating the new world. He helps her get a job at a bathhouse both staffed and frequented by strange creatures, including a bubbling, mountainous pile of foul-smelling liquid called the Stink God. But Haku becomes brusque, and Chihiro is warned that he's a sneak and cannot be trusted.
Keep in mind that much of the contradictory truth comes from Yubaba (Suzanne Pleshette), the witchy bathhouse owner whose greed is surpassed in size only by her head. Her grating voice alone could probably peel the filth from the Stink God. Haku's unwarranted shifts of personality reflect what distinguishes Mr. Miyazaki from Disney, or any other American animator. His movies are as much about moodiness as mood, and the prospect of animated figures' not being what they seem -- either spiritually or physically -- heightens the tension. ''Spirited Away,'' which opens nationwide today, deepens Chihiro's uncertainty by not defining the creatures that inhabit this spirit world in simple good-guy bad-guy terms, making them capricious and unintentionally treacherous.
Using his standard threat of the loss of self is a way that Mr. Miyazaki brings a sense of peril to Chihiro. During her adventures a little piece of Chihiro is chipped away at every turn. She's renamed by Yubaba and learns later that if she doesn't hide her real name away she'll lose her identity forever. And her whininess gradually disappears as she learns responsibility.
No big point is made of it, though fans of Mr. Miyazaki's ''Princess Mononoke,'' which was promoted on a much larger scale, may be let down by the minor-chord fluidity of this film. ''Spirited Away'' is a marriage between the power of ''Mononoke'' and the lively pop-pop-pop of his film ''My Friend Totoro.''
These storytelling subtleties were absorbed by John Lasseter of Pixar -- the man behind the ''Toy Story'' movies -- who also served as executive producer for this English-dubbed version. Undoubtedly something was lost in the translation; watching the parade of wild things flutter, stomp and crawl though the bathhouse will make you wonder what each represents in Japanese mythology. (At one point it's as if every item in the Japanese Sanrio line of toys has come to life.) The cultural weight that the picture bears partly explains why this was the biggest hit ever in Japan, outpacing ''Titanic.''
The beauty of the animation, a skillful blend of hand-painted foreground and well-placed computer background, works to generate the storytelling. It makes all the characters distinct in appearance and keeps them from looking as if they're drifting a couple of inches above the ground.
What the title really applies to is the director himself. After his struggle to get the career-capping ''Mononoke'' to the screen, Mr. Miyazaki retired but is said to have been sparked back to the drawing board after meeting a girl who inspired Chihiro. This child should accompany the director to Los Angeles for the Oscar nomination ''Spirited Away'' will probably receive. The world deserves a glimpse at the slacker-sprite behind so much magic.
''Spirited Away'' 
~
